
CHAPTER VI.
LAURA had now entered on a desperate game, which she resolved at every hazard should
     end in making her the wife of Leslie. Right is so much the essential point in our actions, that
     scarce any villany is deliberately done without justifying it to ourselves; and so Laura, when
     not abandoned to passion, found good reasons in the advantages to Leslie, and in her own
     superior powers of making him happy, to carry her along the path from which she could not think
     of turning. Every instrument must be laid hold of; she had already made her brother an
     unconscious volunteer, and she next prepared her cousin to assist in the cause.
The same fiction which had served with
      Mr. Chanson she made use of to Sir Peter. His flame for
     Laura was not such as to make him stand in the way of any serious matrimonial project; on the
     contrary, he would have been proud to see her chosen by some cavalier of high merit, an
     alliance with whom would have made everything splendid and jovial, and creditable to his own
     admiration. That his cousin Laura should be neglected, or laid aside for another,
     was as impossible as it would be humiliating; and Laura, who had a good insight into motives
     and character, availed herself of this feeling. She had only to sigh a little, and cast her
     eyes once or twice to the ceiling, before Sir Peter inquired whether anything on earth, that he
     could affect, had vexed his darling Laura; and then, with a graceful show of candour, and of
     that confidence which a woman may show to a boy, but a boy already worth trusting, did Laura
     partly hint, and partly tell the same lie she had told her brother, and which she was beginning
     to believe herself.
Sir Peter’s indignation was boundless—
      his desire to approve himself her true knight zealous—he
     would fight Leslie to‐day if she pleased. Laura had only to temper his ardour, and to insinuate
     that at the, point matters were arrived at between herself and Leslie, anything which injured
     him, or drove him into a shyness of the family, would be fatal to her interests. No, the only
     thing Sir Peter could do, was to occupy Elinor’s attention. a little, keep her from such “open
     flirtation” with Leslie.
“There is no harm in that, is there Pet—is there Peter?”
“I should think not, indeed—little coquette that she is—and fool that he is, not
     to see through such feminine arts. She a nun, indeed!”
Accordingly, the day when Leslie thought proper to accept the invitation forwarded by Mr.
     Chanson, upon hearing from his sister that she had accidentally met him, Sir Peter went up to
     Elinor the moment she came into the drawing‐room, and forced her into talk, which he continued
     as he took her into dinner, and sat himself down
      beside her. Leslie had given his arm to Laura, as mistress
     of the house, and had quite determined to pay no attention to Elinor, such as could justify
     Laura in “talking secrets” with him; but he was not prepared to see Elinor an object of
     attention to another; and apparently well pleased to be so.
And so, in fact, she was, for her whole being was at ease now that Leslie was returned, and
     she had leisure to listen to her companion, who was as young as herself, and very gay and
     droll, and made her laugh, as girls will at nonsense. Leslie had habits of perfect
     self‐control, though he was so young, and he forced himself to be at ease so successfully, that
     Laura could not determine in her own mind whether he observed what was going on or not.
     Careless as he seemed, however, he was watching them, and a jealous pang shot through Leslie’s
     heart, as to whether it was possible that this young soldier should ever have indeed had an
     opportunity of seeing Elinor as he had done in that deep wood, by that
      fair fall of waters; and though his consciousness said no,
     still the question made him watch uneasily the progress of their intercourse.
After dinner, Sir Peter, intent on the interests of his cousin, still kept up the attempt to
     monopolise Elinor. He had provided for so doing by engaging her beforehand to sing a particular
     song for him, which, by a great effort of his memory; he had succeeded in remembering to have
     heard from her the evening of his arrival, and when the party was settling to the employments
     of the evening, he followed Laura to the piano‐forte, near which Elinor was working, and while
     Laura played, began to request the execution of the promise he had obtained.
“If you like,” said Elinor, “by and by; but will you be so kind as to let me sing later? Miss
     Chanson wishes those ladies to sing, she told me.”
Sir Peter could not but comply with this modest request, so unlike the answer of young ladies
     more in the world, and moved
      away, while Leslie abruptly took his place, sitting down
     beside her, and assuming that he had that right to her attention which a secret between them
     brought with it.
“You are happy now, are you not?” said he; “there are no more such tears as you say you shed
     over that little bundle of papers?”
Elinor looked up, frightened lest any one should hear.
“No one is listening to us,” said Leslie, “no one can tell what we are saying; the
     insufferable drumming of the piano‐forte prevents the human voice from being heard.”
“Drumming!” said Elinor, with a sudden smile of surprise; “nay, is it not very good
     playing?”
“Do you like it?” said Leslie, suddenly.
“Oh, yes! it is very good indeed.”
“Do you like it?” repeated Leslie, smiling also, but urging his question.
“I think so,” said Elinor; “one ought to like what other people are so kind as to do, and it
     is very difficult music.”
“Still you do not answer. Do you like that loud, hard drumming?”

“When you say loud and hard,” said Elinor, “you teach me what to say. Nobody likes what they
     can call loud, hard drumming.”
“I prejudice you! That is very true,” said Leslie. “So we will leave off talking about it,
     and I will entreat you, the moment it is over, to replace it, by singing the Spirit Song. Do
     you remember, you studied it for me?”
“Yes; and since you have been away I have studied it more, and can sing it better,” said
     Elinor.
“Who would do that for me, except yourself?” said Leslie. “Nobody cares where I go, or what I
     like, or when I shall be back, or whether I die on the road, or live.”
“I do,” said Elinor; “and people who know you better must care more than I.”
“If you say so, never mind the rest of the world,” said Leslie; “and now the
     piano‐forte is at rest. Come, dear Miss Ladylift, let me hear my song.”
Elinor rose, but hung back, while Leslie
      obtained Laura’s permission. Laura assented.
“Nay, why do you ask me? I am always delighted when Elinor can be persuaded to let us hear
     that lovely voice. I merely played a little air to bring people round the piano‐forte.” And
     while she spoke, she looked round for her cousin, and summoned him by a glance, which he well
     understood, and rushed to the rescue, seeing which, Laura moved away, and left the coming
     skirmish to do what mischief it would.
“I am so glad to see you ready to sing,” said Sir Peter; “I was afraid I should have to wait
     long for Adeste.”
“Miss Ladylift is going to have the kindness to sing a song which I have begged for,” said
     Leslie, stiffly.
“But mine first, I hope; you promised me first,” said Sir Peter, in the blandest tone.
“I think you had the goodness to get up on purpose to oblige me,” said Leslie, “did not
     you?”

“Yes,” said Elinor, frightened, and looking round for Laura.
“Then let me find it; here’s the book I know—yes, here is the song.”
“Ah! that’s not fair,” said Sir Peter, “you don’t forget how very kindly you granted my
     petition, and I have been depending upon you.”
“I did promise him,” said Elinor, looking at Leslie humbly and appealingly.
“Did you,” said Leslie, very coldly; “nay, don’t allow me to interfere with your
     arrangements.”
“I can’t be so indifferent,” said Sir Peter; “mine, mine first; Mr. Leslie, you
     see, says it does not matter.”
“Allow Miss Ladylift to determine that point,” said Leslie.
“May I?” said Elinor, joyfully, thinking if she might settle it, the difficulty was over;
     “then let me sing first Adeste, and yours afterwards, Mr. Leslie.”
Leslie made no answer, except a bow, and stepping backward, withdrew from the circle round
     the piano‐forte; nor returned
      to claim the song which Elinor, when she had got through Sir
     Peter’s, at once looked round for him to hear. Her sham admirer did all in his power to take
     her attention from the real one, but Elinor could by no means regain the composure Leslie’s
     displeasure had taken from her, and she sought with her timid eyes, all the evening, the
     opportunity of obtaining reconciliation, which he steadily withheld.
Thus ended the first day of the visit, to which she had looked forward as the time of such
     happiness.
Laura next morning took her to task.
“What makes you walk about with such a mournful air?” said she; “you look like a naughty
     child who wants to kiss and make it up. What ails you?”
“I am not a child,” said Elinor, in her sweet, humble voice; “but I am what you please to
     call naughty ......”
“And want to kiss?” said Laura, scornfully.
“No,” said Elinor, hurt at being turned into ridicule, and at receiving reproof in
      a spirit that did not deserve that treatment.
“What then,” said Laura, “and who is it you have offended?”
“I am afraid I have offended Mr. Leslie.”
“Is it possible you think enough of a man of his age, indeed any age, to trouble yourself
     about offending him or not?” said Laura.
“Why should not I?” said Elinor, aghast.
“Because,” answered Laura, breaking out; “it is the most absurd thing for a girl with any
     proper spirit, I ever heard of in my life.”
“But I have no proper spirit,” said Elinor, who felt that if Leslie would forgive her, she
     would beg pardon from him with all her heart.
“You don’t know even what it is,” said Laura; “upon my word, your conduct is perfectly
     indelicate. You might almost as well go and ask him if he will be kind enough to accept you for
     his wife.”

“His wife!” cried Elinor, quickly; “what has that to do with being sorry to have displeased
     him? Wife! what can you mean?”
“Nonsense! I do hate affected innocence, and all that stuff, merely to impose upon a man.
     Heaven knows they are open enough to flattery; but, really you must allow me to say, that you
     persecute Mr. Leslie, with yours. You follow him about, and look at him, and invite him to your
     side, and force him, really force him to pay you attentions, which he probably would willingly
     he paying elsewhere, only he can’t get rid of you.”
“Oh! indeed, indeed, you mistake!” said Elinor, almost amazed to death; “he can get rid of me
     any moment. Think how he went away yesterday evening, and would not even say good night, and
     indeed I am afraid to seem to be intrusive, and I never do put myself in his way, or do
     anything to speak to him, unless it comes naturally from him.”
“You mean, in short,” said Laura, most disdainfully, “that his constant attendance
      proceeds solely from his own wish for your society.”
“Yes, I suppose so,” said Elinor, bewildered; “I don’t know any other reason.”
“Really, you are a perfect simpleton, or choose to seem so,” said Laura.
“I dare say he is sorry for me,” said Elinor, seeking excuses for Leslie’s kindness. “I am
     away from all my friends, and he is very, very kind in giving me advice.”
“And what right have you to ask him, rather than me,” said Laura; “most women like to consult
     women, rather than young men, and most people will judge those who do otherwise, to be as
     forward and as bold, as I must say, Elinor, you seem to me.”
“Am I bold?” said Elinor, sadly, feeling so fearful, and so shy, that she could not
     comprehend the reproach, and as Laura was habitually out of temper with her, taking it as an
     instance of what she must meekly bear from her hostess, rather than as a true accusation
     against herself.
It influenced her conduct however, towards Leslie, for under Laura’s eye she
      could not act with the total unconsciousness of her
     behaviour hitherto; she was obliged to act by rule, for she had no feeling of having
     transgressed a woman’s duty, and therefore no impulse to direct her. There was, however, always
     such quiet maidenliness about her, that it was only by a shade that she was altered, and Leslie
     being on his high horse, did not so much as perceive it, but thought all the reserve, and all
     the withdrawal of friendliness was on his own side.
Sir Peter learned through Laura, that his plot had succeeded, and took a boyish delight in
     the mischief made, over which he laughed with his cousin, as two children do over a ringdove in
     a string, which they are tormenting; but Elinor, if she did not offer apologies to her kind
     friend Leslie, had no spirit or inclination to laugh or talk with Sir Peter, and was almost as
     silent to him as she had been to Leslie, the first time he sat by her at breakfast.
In this mood, the amusements of the day were arranged. Men have a way of
      employing themselves at amusements, which causes their
     feelings to become secondary to their sports, and thus Leslie, angry, even anxious as he was,
     yet took it as a matter of course that he should join heart and soul in the pastime suggested
     by Sir Peter, and accepted by the Squire. This was a drag, which an adept sportsman was quickly
     sent forward to lead over the country, choosing puzzling places, and paths difficult to follow,
     in order to try the power of some young blood hounds belonging to Mr. Chanson. The most
     perplexing pass thus selected, was a profound gap in the country, at the bottom of which ran
     the brook which formed the waterfall in the wood; and the rocky sides of which fringed with
     trees and bushes, rose very far above the bed of the stream.
On one side of this, Laura promised to take her station, and Elinor was to accompany her in
     order to witness the achievements of the hounds in these difficult circumstances. There is no
     faster running than a drag, and luckily for the sportsmen, the day was a
      cool one, of the now declining autumn, and the slight frost
     made the scent puzzling enough to try the acumen of the eager hounds. They had a long circuit
     to make before they should reach the final point where the ladies were to await them, and these
     latter had arrived at the rendezvous some time before any sound of the chase broke upon the
     amber stillness of the autumn scene.
They sat down together on the stump of a tree, Laura holding a book, and Elinor producing
     from the pocket of her black apron a bit of curiously fine cambric, on which she was working a
     cobweb pattern, the whole of which could have been rolled into a walnut shell. They were quite
     silent. Elinor was afraid of Laura, and her spirits froze under the unsympathetic influence.
     To‐day, especially she was shut into herself, and she mechanically pursued the occupation
     before her, so far pleased that Laura did not disturb her in it.
At length the cheerfulest of sounds broke the silence, the distant tongue of
      hounds, rising and falling, bursting out and subsiding. It
     was a natural piano and forte exactly suiting woods and dingles, and inspiring the ear, which
     heard them for the first time, with the delight of an unexplored pleasure. Elinor, finely
     strung to sounds, took in these with a curiosity and enjoyment which made her fingers stay on
     her work, and her heart send a flush of blood into her changeful cheeks.
“Are they coming?” she said, at last, half rising, and looking at her companion.
“It seems so,” said Laura, coldly, rising also; “I suppose you can hear the hounds?”
“Yes, and now they are nearer; they seem going away again; there! do listen, there’s an
     echo.”
“Everybody knows that,” said Laura.
She walked forward, and Elinor by her side, they approached very nearly the rocky gap worn by
     the water; they could hear the boom of the waterfall far below and the unaccountable
     changefulness in the intensity of its sound which running water
      gives out. It was a wide gap, and presently the bay of the
     hounds increasing, they saw white spots glancing among the underwood, then the whole shape and
     colour of the hounds, full of the tension of the pursuit, and puzzling out their way to the
     brink of the chasm. Here the foremost threw up his head, and changed his note to one of
     distress; others came up, scented the prey to the very edge, and then ceasing their cry of
     pursuit, seemed measuring the leap, and with distracted anxiety ran to and fro, tempting
     themselves to pass it.
At this moment a horseman arrived; he alighted, and cheered the hounds to persevere. It was
     Mr. Chanson himself; he knew the secret pass intended for them, but would only act like magical
     music, applauding their better guesses, but not explaining wherein the achievement lay. They
     were maddened to accomplish it, by his voice, and at last the hound which first came up put
     himself over the edge, where there seemed no hold, and whimpering at
      what he was about to venture, passed down the rock a little
     way, seemed to find a point where the leap was possible, and presently breaking out into music
     again, was seen emerging almost perpendicularly on the other side of the chasm, and away in
     full cry on the opposite bank. Once taught the way, the others followed, and Mr. Chanson as
     soon as he saw they were over, turned his horse up the stream, and gallopped away to a further
     point where was a bridge. He met Sir Peter as he went, and turned him on the same path as
     himself; a minute afterwards the third horseman came up, Leslie, making straight to the chasm.
     His horse and he had been down, as appeared by the mud they were covered with, and to make up
     for the time they had lost, were going their best pace on the track the rider judged by the
     sound, would bring him straight to the hounds.
As he neared the chasm, he caught a glance of the horsemen who were now on the other side; he
     checked the speed of his horse a little, encouraged him by his
      voice and hand, and then rode steadily towards the leap.
     Laura, aware of the danger, cried to him to turn up the stream, but though he saw the
     difficulty, and though he had no wish to be killed, he was at the age, when it seems a matter
     of course not to be killed, and not to fail; and disregarding her entreaties, put
     his horse at the leap, and got safe over. Laura as pale as a corpse, shrieked loudly as he
     leaped. Elinor, quite ignorant there was any peril, was excited by the stirring sight, so that
     she clapped her hands, laughed, and leaped with delight. Leslie saw them both, and when the
     impetus following the leap slackened, he stopped his horse, and giving up the pursuit turned
     him, and dismounted beside the ladies.
“They have run into it now,” said he; “I may as well stop at once.”
Laura had been so thoroughly frightened, that she did not instantly recover. She remonstrated
     with him on the rashness with genuine emotion, which he easily distinguished from any affected nervous‐
      ness, and was flattered by it; but it amused him much more
     to see Elinor’s excited look, which turned to perplexity, as she heard and saw Laura’s
     alarm.
“My horse did it gallantly, did not he?” said Leslie, looking cheerily at Elinor, whose face
     caught and returned his smile.
“Like flying,” said Elinor; “it was very pretty.”
“How childish you are!” said Laura; “you know nothing of the danger.”
“After all, there was none,” said Leslie, “and the appearance of it gave zest to the
     leap.”
“It is very pleasant,” said Elinor, “to see danger, if one is safe.”
“How do you know that?” said Leslie.
“Because in the convent,” said Elinor; answering quickly to his quick question, “the waves
     used to dash against the garden wall, but could not come in, and we all liked to be near them.
     But once the waves broke over, and then we all ran away.”
Leslie laughed, and looked investigatingly at Elinor’s face which had blushed
      brightly, as she replied to his imperative question, and he
     was thinking why she blushed. Laura was little pleased at this effect of Elinor’s simplicity,
     and seeing him inclined to turn his attention entirely to her young companion, suddenly
     declared herself tired, and said they would go home. She chose a path along the rocky channel
     of the brook, where no horse could be even led, and could not refrain from turning her shoulder
     pettishly to Leslie as they parted. He scarcely observed it, he had forgotten also his reigned
     anger with Elinor, and he rode gently away, thinking of the little scene that had passed.
“How moveable her nature is,” said he. “It was made on purpose, I think, to complete mine,
     cast in my mould, when a man had been completed, and it was fit only to form a woman.”
