
CHAPTER VIII.
MARGARET'S DEBUT AS A PUBLIC SINGER.

"Deal gently with them, they have much endured.
 Scoff not at their fond hopes and earnest plans,
 Though they may seem to thee wild dreams and fancies.
 Perchance, in the rough school of stern experience,
They've something learned which Theory does not teach;
 Or if they greatly err, deal gently still,
 And let their error but the stronger plead
 'Give us the light and guidance that we need!'"
Love Thoughts.
One Sunday afternoon, about three weeks after that mournful night, Jem Wilson set out with
     the ostensible purpose of calling on John Barton. He was dressed in his best, his Sunday suit
     of course; while his face glittered with the scrubbing he had bestowed on it. His dark black
     hair had been arranged and re-arranged before the household looking-glass, and in his
     button-hole he stuck a narcissus (a sweet Nancy is its pretty Lancashire name), hoping it would
     attract Mary's notice, so that he might have the delight of giving it her.
It was a bad beginning of his visit of happiness that Mary saw him some minutes before he
     came into her father's house. She was sitting at the end of the dresser, with the little
     window-blind drawn on one side, in order that she might see the passers-by, in the intervals of
     reading her Bible, which lay open before her. So she watched all the greeting a friend gave
     Jem; she saw the face of condolence, the sympathetic shake of the hand, and had time to arrange
     her own face and manner before Jem came in, which he did, as if he had eyes for no one but her
     father, who sat smoking his pipe by the fire, while he read an old "Northern Star," borrowed
     from a neighbouring public-house.
Then he turned to Mary, who, he felt by the sure instinct of love, by which almost his body
     thought, was present. Her hands were busy adjusting her dress; a forced and unnecessary
     movement Jem could not help thinking. Her accost was quiet and friendly, if grave; she felt
     that she reddened like a rose, and wished she could prevent it, while Jem wondered if her
     blushes arose from fear, or anger, or love.
She was very cunning, I am afraid. She pretended to read diligently, and not to listen to a
     word that was said, while, in fact, she heard all sounds, even to Jem's long, deep sighs, which
     wrung her heart. At last she took up her Bible, and as if their conversation disturbed her,
     went up-stairs to her little room. And she had scarcely spoken a word to Jem; scarcely looked
     at him; never noticed his beautiful sweet Nancy, which only awaited her least word of praise to
     be hers! He did not know—that pang was spared—that in her little dingy bed-room, stood a white
     jug, filled with a luxuriant bunch of early spring roses, making the whole room fragrant and
     bright. They were the gift of her richer lover. So Jem had to go on sitting with John Barton,
     fairly caught in his own trap, and had to listen to his talk, and answer him as best he
     might.
"There's the right stuff in this here 'Star,' and no mistake. Such a right-down piece for
     short hours."
"At the same rate of wages as now?" asked Jem.
"Ay, ay! else where's the use? It's only taking out o' the masters' pocket what they can well
     afford. Did I ever tell yo what th' Infirmary chap let me into, many a year agone?"
"No," said Jem, listlessly.
"Well! yo must know I were in th' Infirmary for a fever, and times were rare and bad; and
     there be good chaps there to a man, while he's wick, 
     whate'er they may be about cutting him up at after. [23] So
     when I were better o' th' fever, but weak as water, they says to me, says they, 'If yo can
     write, yo may stay in a week longer, and help our surgeon wi' sorting his papers; and we'll
     take care yo've your belly full o' meat and drink. Yo'll be twice as strong in a week.' So
     there wanted but one word to that bargain. So I were set to writing and copying; th' writing I
     could do well enough, but they'd such queer ways o' spelling that I'd ne'er been used to, that
     I'd to look first at th' copy and then at my letters, for all the world like a cock picking up
     grains o' corn. But one thing startled me e'en then, and I thought I'd make bold to ask the
     surgeon the meaning o't. I've gotten no head for numbers, but this I know, that by far th'
      greater part o' th' accidents as comed in, happened in th' last two hours o' work, when
     folk getten tired and careless. Th' surgeon said it were all true, and that he were going to
     bring that fact to light."
Jem was pondering Mary's conduct; but the pause made him aware he ought to utter some civil
     listening noise; so he said
"Very true."
"Ay, it's true enough, my lad, that we're sadly over-borne, and worse will come of it afore
     long. Block-printers is going to strike; they'n getten a bang-up union, as won't let 'em be put
     upon. But there's many a thing will happen afore long, as folk don't expect. Yo may take my
     word for that, Jem."
Jem was very willing to take it, but did not express the curiosity he should have done. So
     John Barton thought he'd try another hint or two.
"Working folk won't be ground to the dust much longer. We'n a' had as much to bear as human
     nature can bear. So, if th' masters can't do us no good, and they say they can't, we mun try
     higher folk."
Still Jem was not curious. He gave up hope of seeing Mary again by her own good free will;
     and the next best thing would be, to be alone to think of her. So, muttering something which he
     meant to serve as an excuse for his sudden departure, he hastily wished John good afternoon,
     and left him to resume his pipe and his politics.
For three years past, trade had been getting worse and worse, and the price of provisions
     higher and higher. This disparity between the amount of the earnings of the working classes and
     the price of their food, occasioned, in more cases than could well be imagined, disease and
     death. Whole families went through a gradual starvation. They only wanted a Dante to record
     their sufferings. And yet even his words would fall short of the awful truth; they could only
     present an outline of the tremendous facts of the destitution that surrounded thousands upon
     thousands in the terrible years 1839, 1840, and 1841. Even philanthropists who had studied the
     subject, were forced to own themselves perplexed in their endeavour to ascertain the real
     causes of the misery; the whole matter was of so complicated a nature, that it became next to
     impossible to understand it thoroughly. It need excite no surprise then to learn that a bad
     feeling between working-men and the upper classes became very strong in this season of
     privation. The indigence and sufferings of the operatives induced a suspicion in the minds of
     many of them, that their legislators, their magistrates, their employers, and even the
     ministers of religion, were, in general, their oppressors and enemies; and were in league for
     their prostration and enthralment. The most deplorable and enduring evil that arose out of the
     period of commercial depression to which I refer, was this feeling of alienation between the
     different classes of society. It is so impossible to describe, or even faintly to picture, the
     state of distress which prevailed in the town at that time, that I will not attempt it; and yet
     I think again that surely, in a Christian land, it was not known even so feebly as words could
     tell it, or the more happy and fortunate would have thronged with their sympathy and their aid.
     In many instances the sufferers wept first, and then they cursed. Their vindictive feelings
     exhibited themselves in rabid politics. And when I hear, as I have heard, of the sufferings and
     privations of the poor, of provision shops where ha'porths of tea, sugar, butter, and even
     flour, were sold to accommodate the indigent,—of parents sitting in their clothes by the
     fire-side during the whole night for seven weeks together, in order that their only bed and
     bedding might be reserved for the use of their large family,—of others sleeping upon the cold
     hearth-stone for weeks in succession, without adequate means of providing themselves with food
     or fuel (and this in the depth of winter),—of others being compelled to fast for days together,
     uncheered by any hope of better fortune, living, moreover, or rather starving, in a crowded
     garret, or damp cellar, and gradually sinking under the pressure of want and despair into a
     premature grave; and when this has been confirmed by the evidence of their care-worn looks,
     their excited feelings, and their desolate homes,—can I wonder that many of them, in such times
     of misery and destitution, spoke and acted with ferocious precipitation?
An idea was now springing up among the operatives, that originated with the Chartists, but
     which came at last to be cherished as a darling child by many and many a one. They could not
     believe that government knew of their misery; they rather chose to think it possible that men
     could voluntarily assume the office of legislators for a nation, ignorant of its real state; as
     who should make domestic rules for the pretty behaviour of children, without caring to know
     that those children had been kept for days without food. Besides, the starving multitudes had
     heard, that the very existence of their distress had been denied in Parliament; and though they
     felt this strange and inexplicable, yet the idea that their misery had still to be revealed in
     all its depths, and that then some remedy would be found, soothed their aching hearts, and kept
     down their rising fury.
So a petition was framed, and signed by thousands in the bright spring days of 1839,
     imploring Parliament to hear witnesses who could testify to the unparalleled destitution of the
     manufacturing districts. Nottingham, Sheffield, Glasgow, Manchester, and many other towns, were
     busy appointing delegates to convey this petition, who might speak, not merely of what they had
     seen, and had heard, but from what they had borne and suffered. Life-worn, gaunt, anxious,
     hunger-stamped men, were those delegates.
One of them was John Barton. He would have been ashamed to own the flutter of spirits his
     appointment gave him. There was the childish delight of seeing London—that went a little way,
     and but a little way. There was the vain idea of speaking out his notions before so many grand
     folk—that went a little further; and last, there was the really pure gladness of heart, arising
     from the idea that he was one of those chosen to be instruments in making known the distresses
     of the people, and consequently in procuring them some grand relief, by means of which they
     should never suffer want or care any more. He hoped largely, but vaguely, of the results of his
     expedition. An argosy of the precious hopes of many otherwise despairing creatures, was that
     petition to be heard concerning their sufferings.
The night before the morning on which the Manchester delegates were to leave for London,
     Barton might be said to hold a levée, so many neighbours came dropping in. Job Legh had early
     established himself and his pipe by John Barton's fire, not saying much, but puffing away, and
     imagining himself of use in adjusting the smoothing-irons that hung before the fire, ready for
     Mary when she should want them. As for Mary, her employment was the same as that of Beau Tibbs'
     wife, "just washing her father's two shirts," in the pantry back-kitchen; for she was anxious
     about his appearance in London. (The coat had been redeemed, though the silk handkerchief was
     forfeited.) The door stood open, as usual, between the houseplace and back-kitchen, so she gave
     her greeting to their friends as they entered.
"So, John, yo're bound for London, are yo?" said one.
"Ay, I suppose I mun go," answered John, yielding to necessity as it were.
"Well, there's many a thing I'd like yo to speak on to the Parliament people. Thou'lt not
     spare 'em, John, I hope. Tell 'em our minds; how we're thinking we've been clemmed long enough,
     and we donnot see whatten good they'n been doing, if they can't give us what we're all crying
     for sin' the day we were born."
"Ay, ay! I'll tell 'em that, and much more to it, when it gets to my turn; but thou knows
     there's many will have their word afore me."
"Well, thou'lt speak at last. Bless thee, lad, do ask 'em to make th' masters break th'
     machines. There's never been good times sin' spinning-jennies came up."
"Machines is th' ruin of poor folk," chimed in several voices.
"For my part," said a shivering, half-clad man, who crept near the fire, as if ague-stricken,
     "I would like thee to tell 'em to pass th' Short-hours Bill. Flesh and blood gets wearied wi'
     so much work; why should factory hands work so much longer nor other trades? Just ask 'em that,
     Barton, will ye?"
Barton was saved the necessity of answering, by the entrance of Mrs. Davenport, the poor
     widow he had been so kind to; she looked half-fed, and eager, but was decently clad. In her
     hand she brought a little newspaper parcel, which she took to Mary, who opened it, and then
     called out, dangling a shirt collar from her soapy fingers:
"See, father, what a dandy you'll be in London! Mrs. Davenport has brought you this; made new
     cut, all after the fashion.—Thank you for thinking on him."
"Eh, Mary!" said Mrs. Davenport, in a low voice. "Whatten's all I can do, to what he's done
     for me and mine? But, Mary, sure I can help ye, for you'll be busy wi' this journey."
"Just help me wring these out, and then I'll take 'em to th' mangle."
So Mrs. Davenport became a listener to the conversation; and after a while joined in.
"I'm sure, John Barton, if yo are taking messages to the Parliament folk, yo'll not object to
     telling 'em what a sore trial it is, this law o' theirs, keeping childer fra' factory work,
     whether they be weakly or strong. There's our Ben; why, porridge seems to go no way wi' him, he
     eats so much; and I han gotten no money to send him t' school, as I would like; and there he
     is, rampaging about th' streets a' day, getting hungrier and hungrier, and picking up a' manner
     o' bad ways; and th' inspector won't let him in to work in th' factory, because he's not right
     age; though he's twice as strong as Sankey's little ritling [24] of a lad, as works till he cries for his legs aching so, though he is right age,
     and better."
"I've one plan I wish to tell John Barton," said a pompous, careful-speaking man, "and I
     should like him for to lay it afore the Honourable House. My mother comed out o' Oxfordshire,
     and were under-laundry-maid in Sir Francis Dashwood's family; and when we were little ones,
     she'd tell us stories of their grandeur; and one thing she named were, that Sir Francis wore
     two shirts a day. Now he were all as one as a Parliament man; and many on 'em, I han no doubt,
     are like extravagant. Just tell 'em, John, do, that they'd be doing th' Lancashire weavers a
     great kindness, if they'd ha' their shirts a' made o' calico; 'twould make trade brisk, that
     would, wi' the power o' shirts they wear."
Job Legh now put in his word. Taking the pipe out of his mouth, and addressing the last
     speaker, he said:
"I'll tell ye what, Bill, and no offence, mind ye; there's but hundreds of them Parliament
     folk as wear so many shirts to their back; but there's thousands and thousands o' poor weavers
     as han only gotten one shirt i' th' world; ay, and don't know where t' get another when that
     rag's done, though they're turning out miles o' calico every day; and many a mile o't is lying
     in warehouses, stopping up trade for want o' purchasers. Yo take my advice, John Barton, and
     ask Parliament to set trade free, so as workmen can earn a decent wage, and buy their two, ay
     and three, shirts a-year; that would make weaving brisk."
He put his pipe in his mouth again, and redoubled his puffing to make up for lost time.
"I'm afeard, neighbours," said John Barton, "I've not much chance o' telling 'em all yo say;
     what I think on, is just speaking out about the distress that they say is nought. When they
     hear o' children born on wet flags, without a rag t' cover 'em, or a bit o' food for th'
     mother; when they hear of folk lying down to die i' th' streets, or hiding their want i' some
     hole o' a cellar till death come to set 'em free; and when they hear o' all this plague,
     pestilence, and famine, they'll surely do somewhat wiser for us than we can guess at now.
     Howe'er, I han no objection, if so be there's an opening, to speak up for what yo say; anyhow,
     I'll do my best, and yo see now, if better times don't come after Parliament knows all."
Some shook their heads, but more looked cheery; and then one by one dropped off, leaving John
     and his daughter alone.
"Didst thou mark how poorly Jane Wilson looked?" asked he, as they wound up their hard day's
     work by a supper eaten over the fire, which glowed and glimmered through the room, and formed
     their only light.
"No, I can't say as I did. But she's never rightly held up her head since the twins died; and
     all along she has never been a strong woman."
"Never sin' her accident. Afore that I mind her looking as fresh and likely a girl as e'er a
     one in Manchester."
"What accident, father?"
"She cotched [25] her side again a wheel. It were afore
     wheels were boxed up. It were just when she were to have been married, and many a one thought
     George would ha' been off his bargain; but I knew he wern't the chap for that trick. Pretty
     near the first place she went to when she were able to go about again, was th' Oud Church; poor
     wench, all pale and limping she went up the aisle, George holding her up as tender as a mother,
     and walking as slow as e'er he could, not to hurry her, though there were plenty enow of rude
     lads to cast their jests at him and her. Her face were white like a sheet when she came in
     church, but afore she got to th' altar she were all one flush. But for a' that it's been a
     happy marriage, and George has stuck by me through life like a brother. He'll never hold up his
     head again if he loses Jane. I didn't like her looks to-night."
And so he went to bed, the fear of forthcoming sorrow to his friend mingling with his
     thoughts of to-morrow, and his hopes for the future. Mary watched him set off, with her hands
     over her eyes to shade them from the bright slanting rays of the morning sun, and then she
     turned into the house to arrange its disorder before going to her work. She wondered if she
     should like or dislike the evening and morning solitude; for several hours when the clock
     struck she thought of her father, and wondered where he was; she made good resolutions
     according to her lights; and by-and-bye came the distractions and events of the broad full day
     to occupy her with the present, and to deaden the memory of the absent.
One of Mary's resolutions was, that she would not be persuaded or induced to see Mr. Harry
     Carson during her father's absence. There was something crooked in her conscience after all;
     for this very resolution seemed an acknowledgment that it was wrong to meet him at any time;
     and yet she had brought herself to think her conduct quite innocent and proper, for although
     unknown to her father, and certain, even did he know it, to fail of obtaining his sanction, she
     esteemed her love-meetings with Mr. Carson as sure to end in her father's good and happiness.
     But now that he was away, she would do nothing that he would disapprove of; no, not even though
     it was for his own good in the end.
Now, amongst Miss Simmonds' young ladies was one who had been from the beginning a confidant
     in Mary's love affair, made so by Mr. Carson himself. He had felt the necessity of some third
     person to carry letters and messages, and to plead his cause when he was absent. In a girl
     named Sally Leadbitter he had found a willing advocate. She would have been willing to have
     embarked in a love-affair herself (especially a clandestine one), for the mere excitement of
     the thing; but her willingness was strengthened by sundry half-sovereigns, which from time to
     time Mr. Carson bestowed upon her.
Sally Leadbitter was vulgar-minded to the last degree; never easy unless her talk was of love
     and lovers; in her eyes it was an honour to have had a long list of wooers. So constituted, it
     was a pity that Sally herself was but a plain, red-haired, freckled girl; never likely, one
     would have thought, to become a heroine on her own account. But what she lacked in beauty she
     tried to make up for by a kind of witty boldness, which gave her what her betters would have
     called piquancy. Considerations of modesty or propriety never checked her utterance of a good
     thing. She had just talent enough to corrupt others. Her very good-nature was an evil
     influence. They could not hate one who was so kind; they could not avoid one who was so willing
     to shield them from scrapes by any exertion of her own; whose ready fingers would at any time
     make up for their deficiencies, and whose still more convenient tongue would at any time invent
     for them. The Jews, or Mohammedans (I forget which), believe that there is one little bone of
     our body, one of the vertebræ, if I remember rightly, which will never decay and turn to dust,
     but will lie incorrupt and indestructible in the ground until the Last Day: this is the Seed of
     the Soul. The most depraved have also their Seed of the Holiness that shall one day overcome
     their evil, their one good quality, lurking hidden, but safe, among all the corrupt and
     bad.
Sally's seed of the future soul was her love for her mother, an aged bedridden woman. For her
     she had self-denial; for her, her good-nature rose into tenderness; to cheer her lonely bed,
     her spirits, in the evenings when her body was often woefully tired, never flagged, but were
     ready to recount the events of the day, to turn them into ridicule, and to mimic, with
     admirable fidelity, any person gifted with an absurdity who had fallen under her keen eye. But
     the mother was lightly principled like Sally herself; nor was there need to conceal from her
     the reason why Mr. Carson gave her so much money. She chuckled with pleasure, and only hoped
     that the wooing would be long a-doing.
Still neither she, nor her daughter, nor Harry Carson liked this resolution of Mary, not to
     see him during her father's absence.
One evening (and the early summer evenings were long and bright now), Sally met Mr. Carson by
     appointment, to be charged with a letter for Mary, imploring her to see him, which Sally was to
     back with all her powers of persuasion. After parting from him she determined, as it was not so
     very late, to go at once to Mary's, and deliver the message and letter.
She found Mary in great sorrow. She had just heard of George Wilson's sudden death: her old
     friend, her father's friend, Jem's father—all his claims came rushing upon her. Though not
     guarded from unnecessary sight or sound of death, as the children of the rich are, yet it had
     so often been brought home to her this last three or four months. It was so terrible thus to
     see friend after friend depart. Her father, too, who had dreaded Jane Wilson's death the
     evening before he set off. And she, the weakly, was left behind while the strong man was taken.
     At any rate the sorrow her father had so feared for him was spared. Such were the thoughts
     which came over her.
She could not go to comfort the bereaved, even if comfort were in her power to give; for she
     had resolved to avoid Jem; and she felt that this of all others was not the occasion on which
     she could keep up a studiously cold manner.
And in this shock of grief, Sally Leadbitter was the last person she wished to see. However,
     she rose to welcome her, betraying her tear-swollen face.
"Well, I shall tell Mr. Carson to-morrow how you're fretting for him; it's no more nor he's
     doing for you, I can tell you."
"For him, indeed!" said Mary, with a toss of her pretty head.
"Ay, miss, for him! You've been sighing as if your heart would break now for several days,
     over your work; now arn't you a little goose not to go and see one who I am sure loves you as
     his life, and whom you love; 'How much, Mary?' 'This much,' as the children say" (opening her
     arms very wide).
"Nonsense," said Mary, pouting; "I often think I don't love him at all."
"And I'm to tell him that, am I, next time I see him?" asked Sally.
"If you like," replied Mary. "I'm sure I don't care for that or any thing else now;" weeping
     afresh.
But Sally did not like to be the bearer of any such news. She saw she had gone on the wrong
     tack, and that Mary's heart was too full to value either message or letter as she ought. So she
     wisely paused in their delivery, and said in a more sympathetic tone than she had heretofore
     used,
"Do tell me, Mary, what's fretting you so? You know I never could abide to see you cry."
"George Wilson's dropped down dead this afternoon," said Mary, fixing her eyes for one minute
     on Sally, and the next hiding her face in her apron as she sobbed anew.
"Dear, dear! All flesh is grass; here to-day and gone to-morrow, as the Bible says. Still he
     was an old man, and not good for much; there's better folk than him left behind. Is th' canting
     old maid as was his sister alive yet?"
"I don't know who you mean," said Mary, sharply; for she did know, and did not like to have
     her dear, simple Alice so spoken of.
"Come, Mary, don't be so innocent. Is Miss Alice Wilson alive, then; will that please you? I
     haven't seen her hereabouts lately."
"No, she's left living here. When the twins died she thought she could, may be, be of use to
     her sister, who was sadly cast down, and Alice thought she could cheer her up; at any rate she
     could listen to her when her heart grew overburdened; so she gave up her cellar and went to
     live with them."
"Well, good go with her. I'd no fancy for her, and I'd no fancy for her making my pretty Mary
     into a Methodee."
"She wasn't a Methodee, she was Church o' England."
"Well, well, Mary, you're very particular. You know what I meant. Look, who is this letter
     from?" holding up Henry Carson's letter.
"I don't know, and don't care," said Mary, turning very red.
"My eye! as if I didn't know you did know and did care."
"Well, give it me," said Mary, impatiently, and anxious in her present mood for her visitor's
     departure.
Sally relinquished it unwillingly. She had, however, the pleasure of seeing Mary dimple and
     blush as she read the letter, which seemed to say the writer was not indifferent to her.
"You must tell him I can't come," said Mary, raising her eyes at last. "I have said I won't
     meet him while father is away, and I won't."
"But, Mary, he does so look for you. You'd be quite sorry for him, he's so put out about not
     seeing you. Besides you go when your father's at home, without letting on [26] to him, and what harm would there be in going now?"
"Well, Sally! you know my answer, I won't; and I won't."
"I'll tell him to come and see you himself some evening, instead o' sending me; he'd may be
     find you not so hard to deal with."
Mary flashed up.
"If he dares to come here while father's away, I'll call the neighbours in to turn him out,
     so don't be putting him up to that."
"Mercy on us! one would think you were the first girl that ever had a lover; have you never
     heard what other girls do and think no shame of?"
"Hush, Sally! that's Margaret Jennings at the door."
And in an instant Margaret was in the room. Mary had begged Job Legh to let her come and
     sleep with her. In the uncertain fire-light you could not help noticing that she had the
     groping walk of a blind person.
"Well, I must go, Mary," said Sally. "And that's your last word?"
"Yes, yes; good-night." She shut the door gladly on her unwelcome visitor—unwelcome at that
     time at least.
"Oh Margaret, have ye heard this sad news about George Wilson?"
"Yes, that I have. Poor creatures, they've been sore tried lately. Not that I think sudden
     death so bad a thing; it's easy, and there's no terrors for him as dies. For them as survives
     it's very hard. Poor George! he were such a hearty looking man."
"Margaret," said Mary, who had been closely observing her friend, "thou'rt very blind
     to-night, arn't thou? Is it wi' crying? Your eyes are so swollen and red."
"Yes, dear! but not crying for sorrow. Han ye heard where I was last night?"
"No; where?"
"Look here." She held up a bright golden sovereign. Mary opened her large gray eyes with
     astonishment.
"I'll tell you all how and about it. You see there's a gentleman lecturing on music at th'
     Mechanics', and he wants folk to sing his songs. Well, last night th' counter got a sore throat
     and couldn't make a note. So they sent for me. Jacob Butterworth had said a good word for me,
     and they asked me would I sing? You may think I was frightened, but I thought now or never, and
     said I'd do my best. So I tried o'er the songs wi' th' lecturer, and then th' managers told me
     I were to make myself decent and be there by seven."
"And what did you put on?" asked Mary. "Oh, why didn't you come in for my pretty pink
     gingham?"
"I did think on't; but you had na come home then. No! I put on my merino, as was turned last
     winter, and my white shawl, and did my hair pretty tidy; it did well enough. Well, but as I was
     saying, I went at seven. I couldn't see to read my music, but I took th' paper in wi' me, to
     ha' somewhat to do wi' my fingers. Th' folks' heads danced, as I stood as right afore 'em all
     as if I'd been going to play at ball wi' 'em. You may guess I felt squeamish, but mine weren't
     the first song, and th' music sounded like a friend's voice, telling me to take courage. So to
     make a long story short, when it were all o'er th' lecturer thanked me, and th' managers said
     as how there never was a new singer so applauded (for they'd clapped and stamped after I'd
     done, till I began to wonder how many pair o' shoes they'd get through a week at that rate, let
     alone their hands). So I'm to sing again o' Thursday; and I got a sovereign last night, and am
     to have half-a-sovereign every night th' lecturer is at th' Mechanics'."
"Well, Margaret, I'm right glad to hear it."
"And I don't think you've heard the best bit yet. Now that a way seemed opened to me, of not
     being a burden to any one, though it did please God to make me blind, I thought I'd tell
     grandfather. I only telled him about the singing and the sovereign last night, for I thought
     I'd not send him to bed wi' a heavy heart; but this morning I telled him all."
"And how did he take it?"
"He's not a man of many words; and it took him by surprise like."
"I wonder at that; I've noticed it in your ways ever since you telled me."
"Ay, that's it! If I'd not telled you, and you'd seen me every day, you'd not ha' noticed the
     little mite o' difference fra' day to day."
"Well, but what did your grandfather say?"
"Why, Mary," said Margaret, half smiling, "I'm a bit loath to tell yo, for unless yo knew
     grandfather's ways like me, yo'd think it strange. He were taken by surprise, and he said:
     'Damn yo!' Then he began looking at his book as it were, and were very quiet, while I telled
     him all about it; how I'd feared, and how downcast I'd been; and how I were now reconciled to
     it, if it were th' Lord's will; and how I hoped to earn money by singing; and while I were
     talking, I saw great big tears come dropping on th' book; but in course I never let on that I
     saw 'em. Dear grandfather! and all day long he's been quietly moving things out o' my way, as
     he thought might trip me up, and putting things in my way, as he thought I might want; never
     knowing I saw and felt what he were doing; for, yo see, he thinks I'm out and out blind, I
     guess—as I shall be soon."
Margaret sighed, in spite of her cheerful and relieved tone.
Though Mary caught the sigh, she felt it was better to let it pass without notice, and began,
     with the tact which true sympathy rarely fails to supply, to ask a variety of questions
     respecting her friend's musical debut, which tended to bring out more distinctly how successful
     it had been.
"Why, Margaret," at length she exclaimed, "thou'lt become as famous, may be, as that grand
     lady fra' London, as we seed one night driving up to th' concert room door in her
     carriage."
"It looks very like it," said Margaret, with a smile. "And be sure, Mary, I'll not forget to
     give thee a lift now an' then when that comes about. Nay, who knows, if thou'rt a good girl,
     but mayhappen I may make thee my lady's maid! Wouldn't that be nice? So I'll e'en sing to
     mysel' th' beginning o' one o' my songs,

'An' ye shall walk in silk attire,
 An' siller hae to spare.'"
"Nay, don't stop; or else give me something a bit more new, for somehow I never quite liked
     that part about thinking o' Donald mair."
"Well, though I'm a bit tir'd, I don't care if I do. Before I come, I were practising well
     nigh upon two hours this one which I'm to sing o' Thursday. Th' lecturer said he were sure it
     would just suit me, and I should do justice to it; and I should be right sorry to disappoint
     him, he were so nice and encouraging like to me. Eh! Mary, what a pity there isn't more o' that
     way, and less scolding and rating i' th' world! It would go a vast deal further. Beside, some
     o' th' singers said they were a'most certain it were a song o' his own, because he were so
     fidgetty and particular about it, and so anxious I should give it th' proper expression. And
     that makes me care still more. Th' first verse, he said, were to be sung 'tenderly, but
     joyously!' I'm afraid I don't quite hit that, but I'll try.

'What a single word can do!
Thrilling all the heart-strings through,
 Calling forth fond memories,
 Raining round hope's melodies,
 Steeping all in one bright hue—
 What a single word can do!'
Now it falls into th' minor key, and must be very sad like. I feel as if I could do that
     better than t'other.

'What a single word can do!
 Making life seem all untrue,
 Driving joy and hope away,
 Leaving not one cheering ray
Blighting every flower that grew—
 What a single word can do!'"
Margaret certainly made the most of this little song. As a factory worker, listening outside,
     observed, "She spun it reet [27] fine!" And if she only sang it
     at the Mechanics' with half the feeling she put into it that night, the lecturer must have been
     hard to please, if he did not admit that his expectations were more than fulfilled.
When it was ended, Mary's looks told more than words could have done what she thought of it;
     and partly to keep in a tear which would fain have rolled out, she brightened into a laugh, and
     said, "For certain, th' carriage is coming. So let us go and dream on it."
 
 
