<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg text of Endymion</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1880</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="37">
CHAPTER XXXVII
With the assembling of parliament in November recommenced the sittings of the Union Society,
      of which Endymion had for some time been a member, and of whose meetings he was a constant and
      critical, though silent, attendant. There was a debate one night on the government of
      dependencies, which, although all reference to existing political circumstances was rigidly
      prohibited, no doubt had its origin in the critical state of one of our most important
      colonies, then much embarrassing the metropolis. The subject was one which Endymion had
      considered, and on which he had arrived at certain conclusions. The meeting was fully
      attended, and the debate had been conducted with a gravity becoming the theme. Endymion was
      sitting on a back bench, and with no companion near him with whom he was acquainted, when he
      rose and solicited the attention of the president. Another and a well-known speaker had also
      risen, and been called, but there was a cry of “new member,” a courteous cry, borrowed from
      the House of Commons, and Endymion for the first time heard his own voice in public. He has
      since admitted, though he has been through many trying scenes, that it was the most nervous
      moment of his life. “After Calais,” as a wise wit said, “nothing surprises;” and the first
      time a man speaks in public, even if only at a debating society, is also the unequalled
      incident in its way. The indulgence of the audience supported him while the mist cleared from
      his vision, and his palpitating heart subsided into comparative tranquillity. After a few
      pardonable incoherencies, he was launched into his subject, and spoke with the thoughtful
      fluency which knowledge alone can sustain. For knowledge is the foundation of eloquence.
“What a good-looking young fellow!” whispered Mr. Bertie Tremaine to his brother Mr.
      Tremaine Bertie. The Bertie Tremaines were the two greatest swells of the Union, and had a
      party of their own. “And he speaks well.”
“Who is he?” inquired Mr. Tremaine Bertie of their other neighbour.
“He is a clerk in the Treasury, I believe, or something of that sort,” was the reply.
“I never saw such a good-looking young fellow,” said Mr. Bertie Tremaine. “He is worth
      getting hold of. I shall ask to be introduced to him when we break up.”
Accordingly, Mr. Bertie Tremaine, who was always playing at politics, and who, being
      two-and-twenty, was discontented he was not Chancellor of the Exchequer like Mr. Pitt,
      whispered to a gentleman who sate behind him, and was, in short, the whip of his section, and
      signified, as a minister of state would, that an introduction to Mr. Ferrars should be
      arranged.
So when the meeting broke up, of which Mr. Ferrars’ maiden speech was quite the event, and
      while he was contemplating, not without some fair self-complacency, walking home with
      Trenchard, Endymion found himself encompassed by a group of bowing forms and smiling
      countenances, and, almost before he was aware of it, had made the acquaintance of the great
      Mr. Bertie Tremaine, and received not only the congratulations of that gentleman, but an
      invitation to dine with him on the morrow; “quite sans facon.”
Mr. Bertie Tremaine, who had early succeeded to the family estate, lived in Grosvenor
      Street, and in becoming style. His house was furnished with luxury and some taste. The host
      received his guests in a library, well stored with political history and political science,
      and adorned with the busts of celebrated statesmen and of profound political sages. Bentham
      was the philosopher then affected by young gentleman of ambition, and who wished to have
      credit for profundity and hard heads. Mr. Bertie Tremaine had been the proprietor of a close
      borough, which for several generations had returned his family to parliament, the faithful
      supporters of Pitt, and Perceval, and Liverpool, and he had contemplated following the same
      line, though with larger and higher objects than his ancestors. Being a man of considerable
      and versatile ability, and of ample fortune, with the hereditary opportunity which he
      possessed, he had a right to aspire, and, as his vanity more than equalled his talents, his
      estimate of his own career was not mean. Unfortunately, before he left Harrow, he was deprived
      of his borough, and this catastrophe eventually occasioned a considerable change in the views
      and conduct of Mr. Bertie Tremaine. In the confusion of parties and political thought which
      followed the Reform Act of Lord Grey, an attempt to govern the country by the assertion of
      abstract principles, and which it was now beginning to be the fashion to call Liberalism,
      seemed the only opening to public life; and Mr. Bertie Tremaine, who piqued himself on
      recognising the spirit of the age, adopted Liberal opinions with that youthful fervour which
      is sometimes called enthusiasm, but which is a heat of imagination subsequently discovered to
      be inconsistent with the experience of actual life. At Cambridge Mr. Bertie Tremaine was at
      first the solitary pupil of Bentham, whose principles he was prepared to carry to their
      extreme consequences, but being a man of energy and in possession of a good estate, he soon
      found followers, for the sympathies of youth are quick, and, even with an original bias, it is
      essentially mimetic. When Mr. Bertie Tremaine left the university he found in the
      miscellaneous elements of the London Union many of his former companions of school and
      college, and from them, and the new world to which he was introduced, it delighted him to form
      parties and construct imaginary cabinets. His brother Augustus, who was his junior only by a
      year, and was destined to be a diplomatist, was an efficient assistant in these enterprises,
      and was one of the guests who greeted Endymion when he arrived next day in Grosvenor Street
      according to his engagement. The other three were Hortensius, the whip of the party, and Mr.
      Trenchard.
The dinner was refined, for Mr. Bertie Tremaine combined the Sybarite with the Utilitarian
      sage, and it secretly delighted him to astonish or embarrass an austere brother republican by
      the splendour of his family plate or the polished appointments of his household. To-day the
      individual to be influenced was Endymion, and the host, acting up to his ideal of a first
      minister, addressed questions to his companions on the subjects which were peculiarly their
      own, and, after eliciting their remarks, continued to complete the treatment of the theme with
      adequate ability, though in a manner authoritative, and, as Endymion thought, a little
      pompous. What amused him most in this assemblage of youth was their earnest affectation of
      public life. The freedom of their comments on others was only equalled by their confidence in
      themselves. Endymion, who only spoke when he was appealed to, had casually remarked in answer
      to one of the observations which his host with elaborate politeness occasionally addressed to
      him, that he thought it was unpatriotic to take a certain course. Mr. Bertie Tremaine
      immediately drew up, and said, with a deep smile, “that he comprehended philanthropy, but
      patriotism he confessed he did not understand;” and thereupon delivered himself of an address
      on the subject which might have been made in the Union, and which communicated to the
      astonished Endymion that patriotism was a false idea, and entirely repugnant to the principles
      of the new philosophy. As all present were more or less impregnated with these tenets, there
      was no controversy on the matter. Endymion remained discreetly silent, and Augustus—Mr. Bertie
      Tremaine’s brother—who sate next to him, and whose manners were as sympathising as his
      brother’s were autocratic, whispered in a wheedling tone that it was quite true, and that the
      idea of patriotism was entirely relinquished except by a few old-fashioned folks who clung to
      superstitious phrases. Hortensius, who seemed to be the only one of the company who presumed
      to meet Mr. Bertie Tremaine in conversation on equal terms, and who had already astonished
      Endymion by what that inexperienced youth deemed the extreme laxity of his views, both social
      and political, evinced, more than once, a disposition to deviate into the lighter topics of
      feminine character, and even the fortunes of the hazard-table; but the host looked severe, and
      was evidently resolved that the conversation to-day should resemble the expression of his
      countenance. After dinner they returned to the library, and most of them smoked, but Mr.
      Bertie Tremaine, inviting Endymion to seat himself by his side on a sofa at the farther end of
      the room, observed, “I suppose you are looking to parliament?”
“Well, I do not know,” said the somewhat startled Endymion; “I have not thought much about
      it, and I have not yet reached a parliamentary age.”
“A man cannot enter parliament too soon,” said Mr. Bertie Tremaine; “I hope to enter this
      session. There will be a certain vacancy on a petition, and I have arranged to have the
      seat.”
“Indeed!” said Endymion. “My father was in parliament, and so was my grandfather, but I
      confess I do not very well see my way there.”
“You must connect yourself with a party,” said Mr. Bertie Tremaine, “and you will soon
      enter; and being young, you should connect yourself with the party of the future. The country
      is wearied with the present men, who have no philosophical foundation, and are therefore
      perpetually puzzled and inconsistent, and the country will not stand the old men, as it is
      resolved against retrogression. The party of the future and of the speedy future has its
      headquarters under this roof, and I should like to see you belong to it.”
“You are too kind,” murmured Endymion.
“Yes, I see in you the qualities adapted to public life, and which may be turned to great
      account. I must get you into parliament as soon as you are eligible,” continued Mr. Bertie
      Tremaine in a musing tone. “This death of the King was very inopportune. If he had reigned a
      couple of years more, I saw my way to half a dozen seats, and I could have arranged with Lord
      Durham.”
“That was unfortunate,” said Endymion.
“What do you think of Hortensius?” inquired Mr. Bertie Tremaine.
“I think him the most brilliant speaker I know,” said Endymion. “I never met him in private
      society before; he talks well.”
“He wants conduct,” said Mr. Bertie Tremaine. “He ought to be my Lord Chancellor, but there
      is a tone of levity about him which is unfortunate. Men destined to the highest places should
      beware of badinage.”
“I believe it is a dangerous weapon.”
“All lawyers are loose in their youth, but an insular country subject to fogs, and with a
      powerful middle class, requires grave statesmen. I attribute a great deal of the nonsense
      called Conservative Reaction to Peel’s solemnity. The proper minister for England at this
      moment would be Pitt. Extreme youth gives hope to a country; coupled with ceremonious manners,
      hope soon assumes the form of confidence.”
“Ah!” murmured Endymion.
“I had half a mind to ask Jawett to dinner to-day. His powers are unquestionable, but he is
      not a practical man. For instance, I think myself our colonial empire is a mistake, and that
      we should disembarrass ourselves of its burthen as rapidly as is consistent with the dignity
      of the nation; but were Jawett in the House of Commons to-morrow, nothing would satisfy him
      but a resolution for the total and immediate abolition of the empire, with a preamble
      denouncing the folly of our fathers in creating it. Jawett never spares any one’s
      self-love.”
“I know him very well,” said Endymion; “he is in my office. He is very uncompromising.”
“Yes,” said Mr. Bertie Tremaine musingly; “if I had to form a government, I could hardly
      offer him the cabinet.” Then speaking more rapidly, he added, “The man you should attach
      yourself to is my brother Augustus—Mr. Tremaine Bertie. There is no man who understands
      foreign politics like Augustus, and he is a thorough man of the world.”
</div></body></text></TEI>