<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg text of Endymion</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1880</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="72">
CHAPTER IV
In all lives, the highest and the humblest, there is a crisis in the formation of character,
      and in the bent of the disposition. It comes from many causes, and from some which on the
      surface are apparently even trivial. It may be a book, a speech, a sermon; a man or a woman; a
      great misfortune or a burst of prosperity. But the result is the same; a sudden revelation to
      ourselves of our secret purpose, and a recognition of our perhaps long shadowed, but now
      masterful convictions.
A crisis of this kind occurred to Endymion the day when he returned to his chambers, after
      having taken the oaths and his seat in the House of Commons. He felt the necessity of being
      alone. For nearly the last three months he had been the excited actor in a strange and even
      mysterious drama. There had been for him no time to reflect; all he could aim at was to
      comprehend, and if possible control, the present and urgent contingency; he had been called
      upon, almost unceasingly, to do or to say something sudden and unexpected; and it was only
      now, when the crest of the ascent had been reached, that he could look around him and consider
      the new world opening to his gaze.
The greatest opportunity that can be offered to an Englishman was now his—a seat in the
      House of Commons. It was his almost in the first bloom of youth, and yet after advantageous
      years of labour and political training, and it was combined with a material independence on
      which he never could have counted. A love of power, a passion for distinction, a noble pride,
      which had been native to his early disposition, but which had apparently been crushed by the
      enormous sorrows and misfortunes of his childhood, and which had vanished, as it were, before
      the sweetness of that domestic love which had been the solace of his adversity, now again
      stirred their dim and mighty forms in his renovated, and, as it were, inspired consciousness.
      “If this has happened at twenty-two,” thought Endymion, “what may not occur if the average
      life of man be allotted to me? At any rate, I will never think of anything else. I have a
      purpose in life, and I will fulfil it. It is a charm that its accomplishment would be the most
      grateful result to the two beings I most love in the world.”
So when Lady Montfort shortly after opened her views to Endymion as to his visiting Paris,
      and his purpose in so doing, the seeds were thrown on a willing soil, and he embraced her
      counsels with the deepest interest. His intimacy with the Count of Ferroll was the completing
      event of this epoch of his life.
Their acquaintance had been slight in England, for after the Montfort Tournament the Count
      had been appointed to Paris, where he was required; but he received Endymion with a cordiality
      which contrasted with his usual demeanour, which, though frank, was somewhat cynical.
“This is not a favourable time to visit Paris,” he said, “so far as society is concerned.
      There is some business stirring in the diplomatic world, which has re-assembled the fraternity
      for the moment, and the King is at St. Cloud, but you may make some acquaintances which may be
      desirable, and at any rate look about you and clear the ground for the coming season. I do not
      despair of our dear friend coming over in the winter. It is one of the hopes that keep me
      alive. What a woman! You may count yourself fortunate in having such a friend. I do. I am not
      particularly fond of female society. Women chatter too much. But I prefer the society of a
      first-rate woman to that of any man; and Lady Montfort is a first-rate woman—I think the
      greatest since Louise of Savoy; infinitely beyond the Princess d’Ursins.”
The “business that was then stirring in the diplomatic world,” at a season when the
      pleasures of Parisian society could not distract him, gave Endymion a rare opportunity of
      studying that singular class of human beings which is accustomed to consider states and
      nations as individuals, and speculate on their quarrels and misunderstandings, and the
      remedies which they require, in a tongue peculiar to themselves, and in language which often
      conveys a meaning exactly opposite to that which it seems to express. Diplomacy is hospitable,
      and a young Englishman of graceful mien, well introduced, and a member of the House of
      Commons—that awful assembly which produces those dreaded blue books which strike terror in the
      boldest of foreign statesmen—was not only received, but courted, in the interesting circle in
      which Endymion found himself.
There he encountered men grey with the fame and wisdom of half a century of deep and lofty
      action, men who had struggled with the first Napoleon, and had sat in the Congress of Vienna;
      others, hardly less celebrated, who had been suddenly borne to high places by the
      revolutionary wave of 1830, and who had justly retained their exalted posts when so many
      competitors with an equal chance had long ago, with equal justice, subsided into the obscurity
      from which they ought never to have emerged. Around these chief personages were others not
      less distinguished by their abilities, but a more youthful generation, who knew how to wait,
      and were always prepared or preparing for the inevitable occasion when it arrived—fine and
      trained writers, who could interpret in sentences of graceful adroitness the views of their
      chiefs; or sages in precedents, walking dictionaries of diplomacy, and masters of every
      treaty; and private secretaries reading human nature at a glance, and collecting every shade
      of opinion for the use and guidance of their principals.
Whatever their controversies in the morning, their critical interviews and their secret
      alliances, all were smiles and graceful badinage at the banquet and the reception; as if they
      had only come to Paris to show their brilliant uniforms, their golden fleeces, and their grand
      crosses, and their broad ribbons with more tints than the iris.
“I will not give them ten years,” said the Count of Ferroll, lighting his cigarette, and
      addressing Endymion on their return from one of these assemblies; “I sometimes think hardly
      five.”
“But where will the blow come from?”
“Here; there is no movement in Europe except in France, and here it will always be a
      movement of subversion.”
“A pretty prospect!”
“The sooner you realise it the better. The system here is supported by journalists and
      bankers; two influential classes, but the millions care for neither; rather, I should say,
      dislike both.”
“Will the change affect Europe?”
“Inevitably. You rightly say Europe, for that is a geographical expression. There is no
      State in Europe; I exclude your own country, which belongs to every division of the globe, and
      is fast becoming more commercial than political, and I exclude Russia, for she is essentially
      oriental, and her future will be entirely the East.”
“But there is Germany!”
“Where? I cannot find it on the maps. Germany is divided into various districts, and when
      there is a war, they are ranged on different sides. Notwithstanding our reviews and annual
      encampments, Germany is practically as weak as Italy. We have some kingdoms who are allowed to
      play at being first-rate powers; but it is mere play. They no more command events than the
      King of Naples or the Duke of Modena.”
“Then is France periodically to overrun Europe?”
“So long as it continues to be merely Europe.”
A close intimacy occurred between Endymion and the Count of Ferroll. He not only became a
      permanent guest at the official residence, but when the Conference broke up, the Count invited
      Endymion to be his companion to some celebrated baths, where they would meet not only many of
      his late distinguished colleagues, but their imperial and royal masters, seeking alike health
      and relaxation at this famous rendezvous.
“You will find it of the first importance in public life,” said the Count of Ferroll, “to
      know personally those who are carrying on the business of the world; so much depends on the
      character of an individual, his habits of thought, his prejudices, his superstitions, his
      social weaknesses, his health. Conducting affairs without this advantage is, in effect, an
      affair of stationery; it is pens and paper who are in communication, not human beings.”
The brother-in-law of Lord Roehampton was a sort of personage. It was very true that
      distinguished man was no longer minister, but he had been minister for a long time, and had
      left a great name. Foreigners rarely know more than one English minister at a time, but they
      compensated for their ignorance of the aggregate body by even exaggerating the qualities of
      the individual with whom they are acquainted. Lord Roehampton had conducted the affairs of his
      country always in a courteous, but still in a somewhat haughty spirit. He was easy and
      obliging, and conciliatory in little matters, but where the credit, or honour, or large
      interests of England were concerned, he acted with conscious authority. On the continent of
      Europe, though he sometimes incurred the depreciation of the smaller minds, whose self-love he
      may not have sufficiently spared, by the higher spirits he was feared and admired, and they
      knew, when he gave his whole soul to an affair, that they were dealing with a master.
Endymion was presented to emperors and kings, and he made his way with these exalted
      personages. He found them different from what he had expected. He was struck by their intimate
      acquaintance with affairs, and by the serenity of their judgment. The life was a pleasant as
      well as an interesting one. Where there are crowned heads, there are always some charming
      women. Endymion found himself in a delightful circle. Long days and early hours, and a
      beautiful country, renovate the spirit as well as the physical frame. Excursions to romantic
      forests, and visits to picturesque ruins, in the noon of summer, are enchanting, especially
      with princesses for your companions, bright and accomplished. Yet, notwithstanding some
      distractions, Endymion never omitted writing to Lady Montfort every day.
</div></body></text></TEI>