
PART I.
LOVE.
Piccadilly, 2d February 1865
In a window, a few doors from Cambridge House, the following placard some time
                    since invited, apparently without much effect, the notice of the passers-by,—"To
                    let, this desirable family mansion," After a considerable period the "desirable
                    family" seem to have been given up in despair, and the words vanished from the
                    scene; but the board in the window, beginning "to let" remained, while the
                    "mansion" itself was converted upon it into "unfurnished chambers."
As, in the words of that "humble companion," whose life was rendered a burden to
                    her by my poor dear mother, "Money was not so much an object as a comfortable
                    home," I did not hesitate to instal myself in the first floor, which possessed
                    the advantage of a bay-window, with a double sash to keep out the noise,
                    together with an extensive view of Green Park, and a sailor without legs
                    perpetually drawing ships upon the opposite pavement, as a foreground. My friend
                    Lord Grandon, who is an Irish peer with a limited income, took the floor above,
                    as I was desirous of securing myself against thumping overhead; moreover, I am
                    extremely fond of him. When I say that the position which I enjoy socially, is
                    as well adapted for seeing life as the locality I selected for my residence,
                    most of my more fashionable readers will intuitively discover who I am;
                    fortunately, I have no cause to desire to maintain an incognito which would be
                    impossible, though, perhaps, I ought to explain the motives which induce me now
                    to bring myself even more prominently before the public than I have been in the
                    habit of doing.
Sitting in my bay-window the other evening, and reading the 'History of
                    Civilisation,' by my late lamented friend Mr Buckle, it occurred to me that I
                    also would write a history of civilisation—after having seen the world, instead
                    of before doing so, as was the case with that gifted philosopher. Having for
                    many years past devoted myself to the study of my fellow-men in all countries, I
                    thought the time had come when I could, with profit to myself and the world,
                    give it the benefit of my extended experience and my quick observation. No
                    sooner had I arrived at this determination, than with characteristic promptitude
                    I proceeded to put it into execution; and singular though it may appear, it was
                    not until then that I found myself quite incompetent to carry out the vast
                    project I had undertaken. The reason was at once apparent—I had seen and thought
                    too much; and was in the position which my predecessor had failed to reach, of
                    experimentally discovering that the task was beyond the human power of
                    accomplishment. Not easily vanquished, I then thought of subdividing it, and
                    dealing exclusively with a single branch of civilisation. Mr Thomas Taylor
                    Meadows, thought I, has written a very elaborate chapter upon the progress of
                    civilisation as regarded from a Chinese point of view, why should not I look
                    upon it from a purely Piccadillean?—so I immediately looked at it. The hour 11
                        P.M.; a long string of carriages advancing under my
                    windows to Lady Palmerston's; rain pelting; horses with ears pressed back,
                    wincing under the storm; coachmen and footmen presenting the crowns of their
                    hats to it; streams running down their waterproofs, and causing them to glitter
                    in the gaslight; now and then the flash of a jewel inside the carriages; nothing
                    visible of the occupants but flounces surging up at the windows, as if they were
                    made of some delicious creamy substance, and were going to overflow into the
                    street; policemen in large capes, and if I may be allowed the expression,
                    "helmetically" sealed from the wet, keeping order; draggled women on foot
                    "moving" rapidly on. The fine ladies in their carriages moving on too—but not
                    quite so fast.
This Piccadillean view of the progress of civilisation suggested to me many
                    serious reflections; among others, that if I intended to go to Cambridge House
                    myself, the sooner I went to dress the better. Which way are we moving? I mused,
                    as I made the smallest of white bows immediately over a pearl stud in my neck. I
                    gave up the "history" of civilisation. I certainly can't call it "the progress"
                    of civilisation; that does all very well for Pekin, not for London. Shall I do
                    the Gibbon business, and call it "the decline and fall" of civilisation?—and I
                    absently thrust two right-hand gloves into my pocket by mistake, and scrambling
                    across the wet pavement into my brougham, drove in it the length of the file and
                    arrived before I had settled this important question.
While Lady Veriphast, having planted me en tête-à-tête in
                    a remote corner, was entertaining me with her accustomed vivacity, I am
                    conscious of having gazed into those large swimming eyes with a vacant stare so
                    utterly at variance with my usual animated expression, that she said at last,
                    rather pettishly, "What are you thinking about?"
"Civilisation," I said, abruptly.
"You mean Conventionalism," she replied; "have you come to the conclusion, as I
                    have, that all conventionalism is vanity?"
"No; only that it is 'vexation of spirit;' that is the part that belongs to us—we
                    leave the 'vanity' to the women."
"Dear me, I never heard you so solemn and profound before. Are you in love?"
"No," I said; "I am thinking of writing a book, but I don't see my way to
                    it."
"And the subject is the Conventionalism which you call civilisation. Well, I
                    don't wonder at your looking vacant. You are not quite up to it, Lord Frank. Why
                    don't you write a novel?"
"My imagination is too vivid, and would run away with me."
"Nothing else would," she said, laughing; "but if you don't like fiction, you can
                    always fall back upon fact; be the hero of your own romance, publish your diary,
                    and call it 'The Experiences of a Product of the Highest State of Civilisation.'
                    Thus you will be able to write about civilisation and yourself at the same time,
                    which I am sure you will like. I want some tea, please; do you know you are
                    rather dull to-night?" And Lady Veriphast walked me into the middle of the
                    crowd, and abandoned me abruptly for somebody else, with whom she returned to
                    her corner, and I went and had tea by myself.
But Lady Veriphast had put me on the right track: why, I thought as I scrambled
                    back again from my brougham across the wet pavement to my bay-window, should I
                    not begin at once to write about the civilisation of the day? 'The Civilisation
                    of the British Isles, as exhibited in Piccadilly, a Fragment of Contemporaneous
                    Biography,' that would not be a bad title; people would think, if I called it a
                    biography, it must be true; here I squared my elbows before a quantity of
                    foolscap, dipped my pen in the ink, and dashed off the introduction as
                    above.
Next morning I got up and began again as follows: Why should I commit the
                    ridiculous error of supposing that the incidents of my daily life are not likely
                    to interest the world at large? Whether I read the diary of Mr Pepys, or of Lady
                    Morgan—whether I wade through the Journal of Mr Evelyn, or pleasantly while away
                    an hour with the memoirs of "a Lady of Quality," I am equally struck with this
                    traditional practice of the bores and the wits of society, to write at length
                    the records of their daily life, bottle them carefully up in a series of MS.
                    volumes, and leave them to their grandchildren to publish, and to posterity to
                    criticise. Now it has always appeared to me that the whole fun of writing was to
                    watch the immediate effect produced by one's own literary genius. If, in
                    addition to this, it is possible to interest the public in the current events of
                    one's life, what nobler object of ambition could a man propose to himself? Thus,
                    though the circle of my personal acquaintances may not be increased, I shall
                    feel my sympathies are becoming enlarged with each succeeding mark of confidence
                    I bestow upon the numerous readers to whom I will recount the most intimate
                    relations of my life. I will tell them of my aspirations and my failures—of my
                    hopes and fears, of my friends and my enemies. I shall not shrink from alluding
                    to the state of my affections; and if the still unfulfilled story of my life
                    becomes involved with the destiny of others, and entangles itself in an
                    inextricable manner, that is no concern of mine. I shall do nothing to be
                    ashamed of, or that I can't tell; and if truth turn out stranger than fiction,
                    so much the better for my readers. It may be that I shall become the hero of a
                    sensation episode in real life, for the future looks vague and complicated
                    enough; but it is much better to make the world my friend before anything
                    serious occurs, than allow posterity to misjudge my conduct when I am no longer
                    alive to explain it. Now, at least, I have the satisfaction of knowing that
                    whatever happens I shall give my version of the story first. Should the daily
                    tenor of my life be undisturbed, I can always fall back upon the exciting
                    character of my opinions.
As I write, the magnitude of the task I propose to myself assumes still larger
                    proportions. I yearn to develop in the world at large those organs of
                    conscientiousness and benevolence which we all possess but so few exercise. I
                    invoke the cooperation of my readers in this great work: I implore them to
                    accompany me step by step in the crusade which I am about to preach in favour of
                    the sacrifice of self for the public good. I demand their sympathy in this
                    monthly record of my trials as an uncompromising exponent of the motives of the
                    day, and I claim their tender solicitude should I writhe, crushed and mangled by
                    the iron hand of a social tyranny dexterously concealed in its velvet glove. I
                    will begin my efforts at reform with the Church; I may then possibly diverge to
                    the Legislature, and I will mix in the highest circles of society in the spirit
                    of a missionary. I will endeavour to show everybody up to everybody else in the
                    spirit of love; and if they end by quarrelling with each other and with me, I
                    shall at least have the satisfaction of feeling myself divested of all further
                    responsibility in the matter. In my present frame of mind apathy would be
                    culpable and weakness a crime....
Candour compels me to state that when, as I told Lady Veriphast, my imagination
                    becomes heated, my pen travels with a velocity which fails to convey any
                    adequate impression of the seething thoughts which course through my brain. I
                    lose myself in my subject, and become almost insensible to external sensations;
                    thus it happened that I did not hear the door open as I was writing the above,
                    and I was totally unconscious as I was reading fervently aloud the last
                    paragraph, containing those aspirations which I promised to confide to the
                    public, that I had already a listener. Judge of my surprise—I may say
                    dismay—when, just as I had finished, and was biting the end of my pen for a new
                    inspiration, I heard the voice of Grandon close behind my chair. "Well done, my
                    dear Frank," he said—and as he has known me from my boyhood, he can make
                    allowances for my fervent nature. "Your programme is very complete, but I doubt
                    your being able to carry it out. How, for instance, do you propose to open the
                    campaign against the Church?"
If there is one quality upon which I pride myself more than another it is
                    readiness. I certainly had not formed the slightest conception of how these
                    burning thoughts of mine should be put into execution; but I did not hesitate a
                    second in my answer. "I shall go down to a bishop and stay with him in his
                    palace," I replied, promptly.
"Which one?" said Grandon.
I was going to say "Oxbridge," as he is the only one I happen to know; but, in
                    the first place, I am a little afraid of him; and, in the second, I am hardly on
                    sufficiently intimate terms with him to venture to propose myself—so I said,
                    with some effrontery, "Oh, to a colonial bishop, whom you don't know."
"Nor you either, I suspect," laughed Grandon. "Just at present colonial bishops
                    are rather scarce articles, and I have never heard of one in England with a
                    palace, though there are a good many of them dotted about in snug livings,
                    retaining only their lawn sleeves, either to laugh in or remind them of the
                    dignity and the hardships of which they did not die abroad. Their temptations
                    are of a totally different nature from theirs who are members of the House of
                    Peers, and they must be treated apart; in fact, you will have to take them with
                    the missionaries and colonial clergy. I quite agree with you that if there is
                    one thing that is more urgently needed than a missionary to the ball-room, it is
                    a missionary to the missionaries; and as you have had so much experience of
                    their operations abroad, you might become a very useful labourer in the
                    ecclesiastical vineyard."
I need scarcely say that my heart leaped at the thought; it was a work for which
                    I felt myself specially qualified. "Why," I have thought, "should there be a set
                    of men who preach to others, and are never preached at themselves? Every class
                    and condition of life has its peculiar snares and temptations, and one class is
                    set apart to point them out—surely there should be somebody to perform that kind
                    office for them which they do for others. He who is paid to find out the mote
                    that is in his brother's eye, and devotes his energies to its discovery, is of
                    all men the one who requires the most kind and faithful friend to show him the
                    beam which is in his own. I will be that friend, and charge nothing for it,"
                    thought I.
Grandon saw the flush of enthusiasm which mounted to my brow, and looked
                    grave.
"My impulsive friend," he said, "this is a very serious subject; we must beware
                    lest we fall into the error which we blame in others. It is one thing to see the
                    need of the missionary, it is another to rush headlong upon the work. However, I
                    am able to offer you an opportunity of beginning at once, for I have just come
                    to tell you that Dickiefield has given us a joint invitation to go down
                    to-morrow to Dickiefield, to stay till Parliament opens; we shall be certain to
                    find a choice assortment of pagan and theological curiosities in that most
                    agreeable of country-houses, and you may possibly meet the identical colonial
                    bishop at whose palace you proposed staying. The three o'clock train lands us
                    exactly in time for dinner. Will you come?"
"Of course I will. Nothing would justify my neglecting so promising a vineyard in
                    which to commence my labours;" and I rubbed my hands enthusiastically, and sat
                    down to write a series of those "consecrated lies" by means of which dinner
                    engagements, already accepted, are at the last moment evaded.
Dickiefield, 4th February. 
The party here consists of old Lady Broadhem, with that very aspiring young
                    nobleman, her son, the young Earl (old Lord Broadhem died last year), and his
                    sisters, Ladies Bridget and Ursula Newlyte, neither of whom I have seen since
                    they emerged from the nursery.
They had all disappeared to dress for dinner, however, and Dickiefield had not
                    come home from riding, so that when Grandon and I entered the drawing-room, we
                    found only the deserted apparatus of the afternoon tea, a Bishop, and a black
                    man—and we had to introduce ourselves. The Bishop had a beard and an apron, his
                    companion a turban, and such very large shoes, that it was evident his feet were
                    unused to the confinement. The Bishop looked stern and determined; perhaps there
                    was just a dash of worldliness about the twist of his mustache. His companion
                    wore a subdued and unctuous appearance; his face was shaved; and the whites of
                    his eyes were very bloodshot and yellow. Neither of them was the least
                    embarrassed when we were shown in; Grandon and I both were slightly. "What a
                    comfort that the snow is gone," said I to the Bishop.
"Yes," said his lordship; "the weather is very trying to me, who have just
                    arrived from the Caribbee Islands."
"I suppose you have accompanied his lordship from the Caribbee Islands," said I,
                    turning to the swarthy individual, whom I naturally supposed to be a specimen
                    convert.
"No," he said; "he had arrived some months since from Bombay."
"Think of staying long in England?" said Grandon.
"That depends upon my prospects at the next general election. I am looking out
                    for a borough."
"Dear me!" said Grandon; and we all, Bishop included, gazed on him with
                    astonishment.
"My name is Chundango," he went on. "My parents were both Hindoos. Before I was
                    converted my other name was Juggonath; now I am John. I became acquainted with a
                    circle of dear Christian friends in Bombay, during my connection, as catechist,
                    with the Tabernacle Missionary Society, was peculiarly favoured in some
                    mercantile transactions into which I subsequently entered in connection with
                    cotton, and have come to spend my fortune, and enter public life, in this
                    country. I was just expressing to our dear friend here," pointing in a
                    patronising way towards the Bishop, "my regret at finding that he shares in
                    views which are becoming so prevalent in the Church, and are likely to taint the
                    Protestantism of Great Britain and part of Ireland."
"Goodness," thought I, "how this complicates matters! which of these two now
                    stands most in need of my services as a missionary?" As Dickiefield was lighting
                    me up to my bedroom, I could not resist congratulating him upon his two guests.
                    "A good specimen of the 'unsound muscular,' the Bishop," said I.
"Not very," said Dickiefield; "he is not so unsound as he looks, and he is not
                    unique, like the other. I flatter myself I have under my roof the only
                    well-authenticated instance of the Hindoo converted millionaire. It is true he
                    became a 'Government Christian' when he was a poor boy of fifteen, and began
                    life as a catechist; then he saw a good mercantile opening, and went into
                    cotton, out of which he has realised an immense fortune, and now is going into
                    political life in England, which he could not have done in an unconverted
                    condition. Who ever heard before of a Bombay man wanting to get into Parliament,
                    and coming home with a carte du pays all arranged before
                    he started? He advocates extension of the franchise, ballot, and the Evangelical
                    Alliance, so I thought I would fasten him on to Broadhem—they'll help to float
                    each other."
"Who else have you got here besides?" I asked.
"Oh, only a petroleum aristocrat from the oil regions of America—another
                    millionaire. He is a more wonderful instance even than Chundango, for he was a
                    poor man three months ago, when he 'struck oil.' You will find him most
                    intelligent, full of information; but you will look upon him, of course, as the
                    type of the peculiar class to which he belongs, and not of Americans generally."
                    And my warm-hearted and eccentric friend, Lord Dickiefield, left me to my
                    meditations and my toilet.
"I shall probably have to take one of these Broadhem girls in to dinner," thought
                    I, as I followed the rustle of their crinolines down-stairs back to the
                    drawing-room. So I ranged myself near the one with dark hair and blue eyes—I
                    like the combination—to the great annoyance of Juggonath, who had got so near
                    her for the same purpose that his great foot was on her dress.
"I beg your pardon, Mr Juggernaut," said I, giving him a slight shove, "I think
                    you are standing——"
"Chundango, sir, if you please," said he, unconsciously making way for me,
                    "Juggonath is the name which my poor benighted countrymen——"
"Juggernaut still speaking, as they say in the telegraphic reports from the House
                    of Commons," I remarked to Lady Ursula, as I carried her off triumphantly; and
                    the Indian's voice was lost in the hum of the general movement towards the
                    dining-room.
I have promised not to shrink from alluding to those tender sensibilities which
                    an ordinary mortal jealously preserves from the rough contact of his fellow-men;
                    but I am not an ordinary mortal, and I have no hesitation in saying, that never
                    in my life have I gone through such a distinct change of feeling in the same
                    period as during the two hours we sat at that dinner. Deeply versed as I am in
                    every variety of the sex, married or single, how was I to know that Lady Ursula
                    was as little like the rest of the species as our Bombay friend was to wealthy
                    Hindoos generally? What reason had I to suppose that Lady Broadhem's daughter
                    could possibly be a new type?
Having been tolerably intimate at Broadhem House before she was out, I knew well
                    the atmosphere which had surrounded her youth, and took it for granted that she
                    had imbibed the family views.
"Interesting creature, John Chundango, Esq.," said I, for I thought she had
                    looked grave at the flippancy of my last remark; "he has quite the appearance of
                    a 'Brand.'"
"A what?" said Lady Ursula, as she looked up and caught him glaring fixedly at
                    her with his great yellow eyeballs from the other side of the table.
"Of course I don't mean of the 'whipper-in' of the Liberal party, but of one
                    rescued from fire. I understand that his great wealth, so far from having proved
                    a snare to him, has enabled him to join in many companies for the improvement of
                    Bombay, and that his theological views are quite unexceptionable."
"If his conversion leads him to avoid discussing either his neighbours or their
                    theology, Lord Frank, I think he is a person whom we may all envy."
Is that a hit at her mother or at me? thought I. At Broadhem House, society and
                    doctrine used to be the only topics of discussion. My fair friend here has
                    probably had so much of it that she has gone off on another tack; perhaps she is
                    a "still deep fast" one. As I thought thus, I ran over in my mind my young-lady
                    categories, as follows:—
        {The wholly worldly First, { and        {The worldly holy.
In this case the distinction is very fine; but though they are bracketed
                    together, there is an appreciable difference, which perhaps, some day when I
                    have time, I shall discuss.
Second, "The still deep fast."
This may seem to be a contradiction in terms; but the fact is, while the upper
                    surface seems tranquil enough, there is a strong rapid undercurrent. The danger
                    is, in this case, that you are very apt to go in what is called a "header." The
                    moment you dive you get caught by the undercurrent, and the chances are you
                    never rise to the surface again.
Third, "The rippling glancing fast."
This is less fatal, but to my mind not so attractive as the other. The ripples
                    are produced by quantities of pebbles, which are sure to give one what is called
                    in America "a rough time." The glancing is only dangerous to youths in the first
                    stage, and is perfectly innocuous after one season.
Fourth, "The rushing gushing fast."
This speaks for itself, and may be considered perfectly harmless.
There are only two slows—the "strong-minded blue slow," and the "heavy slow."
The "strong-minded blue slow" includes every branch of learning. It is extremely
                    rare, and alarming to the youth of the day. I am rather partial to it
                    myself.
The "heavy slow" is, alas! too common.
To return to Lady Ursula: not "worldly holy," that was quite clear; certainly
                    neither of the "slows," I could see that in her eye, to say nothing of the
                    retort; not "rippling glancing," her eye was not of that kind either; certainly
                    not "rushing gushing." What remained? Only "Wholly worldly," or "still deep
                    fast."
These were the thoughts that coursed through my mind as I pondered over her last
                    remark. I had not forgotten that I had a great work to accomplish. The
                    missionary spirit was ever burning within me, but it was necessary to examine
                    the ground before attempting to prepare it for seed. I'll try her as "still
                    deep," thought I.
"Did you go out much last season?" I said, by way of giving an easy turn to the
                    conversation.
"No; we have been very little in London, but we are going up this year. We have
                    always resisted leaving the country, but mamma wants to make a home for
                    Broadhem."
"Ah! it is his first season, and naturally he will go out a great deal. Of course
                    you know the three reasons which take men into society in London," I said, after
                    a pause.
"No, I don't. What are they?"
"Either to find a wife, or to look after one's wife, or to look after somebody
                    else's."
I was helping myself to potatoes as I made this observation in a tone of easy
                    indifference; but as she did not immediately answer, I glanced at her, and was
                    at once overcome with remorse and confusion; her neck and face were suffused
                    with a glow which produced the immediate effect upon my sensitive nature of
                    making me feel a brute; her very eyelids trembled as she kept them steadily
                    lowered: and yet what had I said which I had not repeatedly said before to both
                    the "slows," one of the "worldlies," and all the "fasts"? Even some of the
                    "worldly holies" rather relish this style of conversation, though I always wait
                    for them to begin it, for fear of accidents. Fortunately, however much I am
                    moved, I never lose my presence of mind; so I deliberately upset my
                    champagne-glass into her plate, and, with the delicacy and tact of a refined
                    nature, so worded the apologies with, which I overwhelmed her, that she forgave
                    my first gaucherie in laughing over the second.
She can be nothing now, thought I, but "wholly worldly," but she should be
                    ticketed, like broadcloth, "superfine;" so I must tread cautiously.
"I hear Lord Broadhem is going to make his political début
                    in a few days," I remarked, after a pause. "What line does he think of
                    taking?"
"He has not told me exactly what he means to say, as I am afraid we do not quite
                    agree in what philosophers call 'first principles,'" she replied, with a smile
                    and a slight sigh.
"Ah!" I said, "I can guess what it is; he is a little too Radical for you, but
                    you must not mind that; depend upon it, an ambitious young peer can't do better
                    than ally himself with the Manchester school. They have plenty of talent, but
                    have failed as yet to make much impression upon the country for lack of an
                    aristocrat. It is like a bubble company in the City; they want a nobleman as
                    chairman to give an air of respectability to the direction. He might perhaps be
                    a prophet without honour if he remained in his own country, so he is quite right
                    to go to Manchester. I look upon cotton, backed by Exeter Hall, as so strong a
                    combination, that they would give an immense start in public life to a young man
                    with great family prestige, even of small abilities; but as Broadhem has good
                    natural talents, and is in the Upper House into the bargain, the move, in a
                    strategical point of view, so far as his future career is concerned, is
                    perfect."
"I cannot tell you, Lord Frank," said Lady Ursula, "how distressed I am to hear
                    you talk in this way. As a woman, I suppose I am not competent to discuss
                    politics; and if Broadhem conscientiously believes in manhood suffrage and the
                    Low Church, and considers it his duty before God to lose no opportunity of
                    propagating his opinions, I should be the first to urge his using all the
                    influence which his name and wealth give him in what would then become a sacred
                    duty; but the career that you talk about is not a sacred duty. It is a wretched
                    Will-o'-the-wisp that tempts men to wade through mire in its pursuit, not the
                    bright star fixed above them in the heavens to light up their path. I firmly
                    believe," she went on, as she warmed to her theme, "that that one word 'Career,'
                    has done more to demoralise public men than any other word in the language. It
                    is one embodiment of that selfishness which we are taught from our cradles. Boys
                    go to school with strict injunctions if possible to put self at the top of it.
                    They take the highest honours at the university purely for the sake of self. How
                    can we expect when they get into Parliament that they should think of anything
                    but self, until at last the most conscientious of them is only conscientious by
                    contrast? Who is there that ever tells them that personal ambition is a sin the
                    most hateful in the sight of God, the first and not the
                    last 'infirmity of noble minds'? I know you think me foolish and unpractical,
                    and will tell me mine is an impossible standard; but I don't believe in
                    impossible standards where public morality is concerned. At all events, let us
                    make some attempt in an upward direction; and as a first step I propose to
                    banish from the vocabulary that most pernicious of all words, 'A Career.'"
She stopped, with eyes sparkling and cheeks flushed; by the way, I did not before
                    remark, for I only now discovered, that she was lovely—"wholly worldly"—what
                    sacrilege! say rather "barely mortal;" and I forthwith instituted a new
                    category. My own ideas, thought I, expressed in feminine language; she is
                    converted already, and stands in no need of a missionary. Grandon himself could
                    not take higher ground; as I thought of him I looked up, and found his eyes
                    fixed upon us. "My friend Grandon would sympathise most cordially in your
                    sentiments," I said, generously; for I had fallen a victim in preparing the
                    ground; I had myself tumbled into the pit which I had dug for her; for had I not
                    endeavoured to entrap her by expressing the most unworthy opinions, in the hope
                    that by assenting to them she would have furnished me with a text to preach
                    upon?
"Yes," she replied, in a low tone, and with a slight tremor in her voice, "I know
                    what Lord Grandon's views are, for he was staying with us at Broadhem a few
                    weeks ago, and I heard him upon several occasions discussing the subject with my
                    brother."
"Failed to convert him, though, it would appear," said I, thinking what a
                    delightful field for missionary operations Broadhem House would be. "Perhaps I
                    should be more successful. Grandon wants tact. Young men sometimes require very
                    delicate handling."
"So do young women," said Lady Ursula, laughing. "Will you please look under the
                    table for my fan?" and away sailed the ladies, leaving me rather red from having
                    got under the table, and very much in love indeed.
I was roused from the reverie into which I instantly fell by Dickiefield telling
                    me to pass the wine, and asking me if I knew my next neighbour. I looked round
                    and saw a young man with long flaxen hair, blue eyes, and an unhealthy
                    complexion, dexterously impaling pieces of apple upon his knife, and conveying
                    them with it to his mouth. "Mr Wog," said Dickiefield, "let me introduce you to
                    Lord Frank Vanecourt."
"Who did you say, sir?" said Mr Wog, in a strong American accent, without taking
                    the slightest notice of me.
"Lord Frank Vanecourt," said Dickiefield.
"Lord Frank Vanecourt, sir, how do you do, sir?—proud to make your acquaintance,
                    sir," said Mr Wog.
"The same to you, sir," said I. "Pray, where were you raised?" I wanted to show
                    Mr Wog that I was not such a barbarian as he might imagine, and knew how to ask
                    a civil question or two.
"Well, sir, I'm a Missouri man," he replied. "I was a captain under Frank Blair,
                    till I was taken bad with chills and fever; then I gave up the chills and kept
                    the fever—'oil-fever' they call it down to Pithole—you've heard of Pithole?"
"Yes," I said, I had heard of that magical city.
"Well, just as I struck oil, one of your English lords came over there for the
                    purpose of what he called 'getting up petroleum' and we were roommates in the
                    same hotel for some time, and got quite friendly; and when he saw my new
                    kerosene lamp, and found I was coming to have it patented in this country, he
                    promised to help me to get up a Patent Lamp Company, and gave me letters to some
                    of your leading aristocracy; so, before leaving, I saw the President, and told
                    him I would report on the state of feeling in your highest circles about our
                    war. We know what it is in your oppressed classes, but it aint every one has a
                    chance, like me, of finding out how many copperheads there are among your lords.
                    My father, sir, you may have heard of by name—Appollonius T. Wog, the founder,
                    and, I may say, the father of the celebrated 'Pollywog Convention,' which was
                    named after him, and which unfortunately burst up just in time to be too late to
                    save our country from bursting up too."
I expressed to Mr Wog my condolences on the premature decease of the Pollywog
                    Convention, and asked him how long he had been in England, and whom he had
                    seen.
"Well, sir," he said, "I have only been here a few days, and I have seen
                    considerable people; but none of them were noblemen, and they are the class I
                    have to report upon. The Earl of Broadhem, here, is the first with whom I have
                    conversed, and he informs me that he has just come from one of your
                    universities, and that the sympathies of the great majority of your rising youth
                    are entirely with the North."
"You may report to your Government that the British youth of the present day, hot
                    from the university, are very often prigs."
"Most certainly I will," said Mr Wog; "the last word, however, is one with which
                    I am not acquainted."
"It is an old English term for profound thinker," I replied.
Mr Wog took out a pocket-book, and made a note; while he was doing so, he said,
                    with a sly look, "Have you an old English word for 'quite a fine gurl'?"
"No," I said; "they are a modern invention."
"Well, sir, I can tell you the one that sat 'twixt you and me at dinner would
                    knock the spots out of some of our 'Sent' Louis belles."
In my then frame of mind the remark caused me such acute pain that I plunged into
                    a conversation that was going on between Grandon and Dickiefield on the present
                    state of our relations with Brazil, and took no further notice of Mr Wog for the
                    rest of the evening; only, as my readers may possibly hear more of him in
                    society during this season, I have thought it right to introduce him to them at
                    once.
We all went to hear Broadhem's speech next day, and whatever might have been our
                    private opinion upon the matter, we all, with the exception of Grandon and Lady
                    Ursula, warmly congratulated him upon it afterwards. John Chundango and Joseph
                    Caribbee Islands both made most effective speeches, but we did not feel the
                    least called upon to congratulate them: they each alluded with great affection
                    to the heathen and to Lord Broadhem. Chundango drew a facetious contrast between
                    his lordship and an effeminate young Eastern prince, which was highly applauded
                    by the audience that crowded the town-hall of Gullaby; and Joseph made a sort of
                    grim joke about the probable effect of the "Court of Final Appeal" upon the
                    theological tenets of the Caribbee Islanders, that made Lady Broadhem cough
                    disapprobation, and everybody else on the platform feel uncomfortable. I confess
                    I have rather a weakness for Joseph. He has a blunt off-hand way of treating the
                    most sacred topics, that you only find among those who are professionally
                    familiar with the subject. There is something refreshingly muscular in the way
                    he lounges down to the smoking-room in an old grey shooting-coat, and lights the
                    short black meerschaum, which he tells you kept off fever in the Caribbee
                    Islands, while the smoke loses itself in the depths of his thick beard, which he
                    is obliged to wear because of his delicate throat. There is a force and an ease
                    in his mode of dealing with inspiration at such a moment which you feel must
                    give him an immense ascendancy over the native mind.
He possesses what may be termed a dry ecclesiastical humour, differing entirely
                    from Chundango's, whose theological fun takes rather the form of Scriptural
                    riddles, picked up while he was a catechist. Neither he nor Broadhem smoke, so
                    we had Wog and the Bishop to ourselves for half an hour before going to bed.
                    "You must come and breakfast with me some morning in Piccadilly to meet my
                    interesting friend Brother Chrysostom, my lord," said I.
I always like to give a bishop his title, particularly a missionary bishop; it is
                    a point of ecclesiastical etiquette about which I have heard that the
                    propagators of Christianity were very particular.
"If you will allow me, sir, I will join the party," said Mr Wog, before the
                    Bishop could reply; "and as I don't know where Piccadilly is, I'll just ask the
                    Bishop to bring me along. There is a good deal of law going on between your
                    bishops just now," our American friend went on, "and I should like to know the
                    rights of it. We in our country consider that your Ecclesiastical Court is a
                    most remarkable institution for a Christian land. Why sir, law is strictly
                    prohibited in a certain place; and it seems to me that you might as well talk of
                    a good devil as a religious court. If it is wrong for a layman to go to law, it
                    must be wrong for a bishop. What's sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander;
                    that proverb holds good in your country as well as mine, don't it?"
"The Ecclesiastical Court is a court of discipline and doctrine rather than of
                    law," said Dickiefield.
"Well, it's a court anyhow you fix it; and your parsons must be a bad lot to want
                    a set of lawyers reg'larly trained to keep them in order."
"Perhaps Parson Brownlow would have been the better of a court of some kind,"
                    said the Bishop. "It seems to me that to be a minister of the Gospel at one
                    moment, a colonel at another, and the Governor of a State at a third,
                    illustrates the abuses which arise when such courts don't exist. With us, now,
                    when a man once takes orders, he remains in them for the rest of his life."
"Even after he has concluded not to obey them, eh?" asked Mr Wog.
"Ah, Mr Wog," I interrupted, "before you return to the oil regions, you must make
                    yourself acquainted with the enormous advantages connected with a State Church.
                    You must grasp the idea that it is founded chiefly upon Acts of Parliament—that
                    the clergy are only a paid branch of the Civil Service, exercising police
                    functions of a very lofty and important character. The 'orders' come from the
                    Queen, the 'Articles' are interpreted by the Privy Council, and 'England expects
                    every clergyman to do his duty.' As I think some of the late doctrinal decisions
                    of the judicial committee are questionable, I am drawing up a bill for the
                    reform of the Protestant religion, and for the addition of a fortieth article to
                    the existing thirty-nine. If I can carry it through both Houses of Parliament,
                    all the convocations in Christendom cannot prevent the nation from accepting it
                    as absolute divine truth; and I shall have the extreme satisfaction of feeling
                    that I am manufacturing a creed for the masses, and thus securing a theological
                    progress commensurate with our educational enlightenment. As long as the law of
                    the land enables a majority of the Legislature to point out the straight and
                    narrow way to the archbishops and bishops who have to lead their flocks along
                    it, I have no fear for the future. It must be a comfort to feel, that if the
                    worst comes to the worst, you have, as in the House of Commons, to lean upon 'my
                    lord.'"
But the "dry ecclesiastical humour" of the Bishop, to which I have referred, did
                    not evidently run in the same channel as mine.
"I don't think," he said, sternly, "that this is either the place or the mode in
                    which to discuss subjects of so solemn a nature."
"I was only speaking of the system generally," I retorted, "and did not propose
                    to enter here upon any doctrinal details of a really sacred character; those I
                    leave to ecclesiastical dignitaries and learned divines with initials, to
                    ventilate in a sweet Christian spirit in the columns of the daily press."
But the Bishop had already lit his candle, and with an abrupt "good night,"
                    vanished.
"Really, Frank," said Dickiefield, "it is not fair of you to drive my guests to
                    bed before they have finished their pipes in that way. What you say may be
                    perfectly true, but there can be no sort of advantage in stating it so
                    broadly."
"My dear Dickiefield, how on earth is our friend Wog here to understand what his
                    southern countryman would call 'our peculiar institution,' if somebody does not
                    enlighten him? I want him, on his return, to point out to the President the
                    advantage of substituting a State Church for the State rights which are so
                    rapidly disappearing." Whereupon we diverged into American politics; and I asked
                    Grandon an hour later, as we went to bed, what he thought of my first missionary
                    effort.
"If the effect of your preaching is to drive your listeners away," he said,
                    laughing, "I am afraid it will not meet with much success."
"It is a disagreeable task, but somebody must do it," I replied, feeling really
                    discouraged. "It makes me quite sad to look at these poor wandering shepherds,
                    who really mean to do right, but who are so utterly bewildered themselves, that
                    they have lost all power of guiding their flocks without the assistance of
                    lawyers. When did these latter bring back 'the key of knowledge,' that one of
                    old said they had 'taken away?' or why are they not as 'blind leaders of the
                    blind' now as they were then? If I speak harshly, it is because I fancy I see a
                    ditch before them. I shall feel bound to trouble the Bishop again with a few
                    practical remarks. There is no knowing whether even he may not be brought to
                    perceive that you might as well try to extract warmth from an iceberg as divine
                    inspiration from the State, and that a Church without inspiration is simply a
                    grate without fire. The clergy may go on teaching for doctrine the commandments
                    of men, and stand and shiver in a theology which comes to them filtered through
                    the Privy Council, and which is as cold and gloomy as the cathedrals in which it
                    is preached. But the congregations who are crying aloud for light and heat will
                    go and look for them elsewhere."
"You are a curious compound, Frank," said Grandon; "I never knew a man whose
                    moods changed so suddenly, or whose modes of thinking were so spasmodic and
                    extreme; however, I suppose you are intended to be of some use in the world"—and
                    he looked at me as a philosopher might at a mosquito.
"By the way, we must leave by the early train to-morrow if we want to get to town
                    in time for the opening of Parliament."
"I think I shall stay over to-morrow," I answered. "Broadhem is going up, but the
                    ladies are going to stay two days longer, and the House can open very well
                    without me; besides, Chundango and the Bishop are going to stay over
                    Sunday."
"That is an inducement, certainly," said Grandon. "Come, you must have some other
                    reason!"
"My dear old fellow," said I, putting my hand on Grandon's shoulder, "my time is
                    come at last. Haven't you remarked what low spirits I have been in since dinner?
                    I can't bear it for another twenty-four hours! You know my impulsive sensitive
                    nature. I must know my fate at once from her own lips."
"Whose own lips?" said Grandon, with his eyes very wide open.
"Lady Ursula's, of course!" I replied. "I knew her very well as a child, so there
                    is nothing very sudden about it.
"Well, considering you have never seen her since, I don't quite agree with you,"
                    he said, in a deeper tone than usual. "In your own interest, wait till you know
                    a little more of her."
"Not another day! Good-night!" and I turned from him abruptly.
"I'll put myself out of suspense to-morrow, and keep the public in it for a
                    month," thought I, as I penned the above for their benefit, after which I
                    indulged in two hours of troubled sleep.
