
PART IV.
THE WORLD.
Piccadilly, May. 
The great difficulty which I find in this record of my eventful existence is,
                    that I have too much to say. The sensations of my life will not distribute
                    themselves properly. It is quite impossible for me to cram all that I think,
                    say, and do every month into the limited space at my disposal. Thus I am
                    positively overwhelmed with the brilliant dialogues, the elevating reflections,
                    and the thrilling incidents, all of which I desire to relate. No one who has not
                    tried this sort of thing can imagine the chronological, to say nothing of the
                    crinological, difficulties in which I find myself. For instance, the incidents
                    which occupied the whole of my last chapter took place in twenty-four hours, and
                    yet how could I have left out either the poison-scene, or my interview with
                    Grandon, or Spiffy's interesting social projects? Much better have left out the
                    poison-scene, say some of my critical friends. It was not natural—too grotesque;
                    but is that my fault? If nature has jammed me into a most unnatural and
                    uncomfortable niche in that single step which is said to lead from the sublime
                    to the ridiculous, am I responsible for it? If, instead of taking merely a
                    serio-comic view of life, like some of my acquaintances, I regard it from a
                    tragic-burlesque aspect, how can I help it? I did not put my ideas into my own
                    head, nor invent the extraordinary things that happen to me,—and this is the
                    reflection which renders me so profoundly indifferent to criticism. I shall have
                    reviewers finding out that I am inconsistent with myself, and not true to nature
                    here—as, for instance, when I fell violently in love with Ursula in one evening;
                    or to the first principles of art there—as when I wrote to propose to her next
                    morning: as if both art and nature could not take care of themselves without my
                    bothering my head about them. Once for all, then, my difficulties do not arise
                    from this source at all; they are, as I have said before, of the most simple
                    character. In fact, they resolve themselves into Kant's two great a priori ideas, time and space. Now I could quite easily
                    run on in the moral reflective vein to the end of the chapter, but then what
                    should I do with the conversations which I ought to record, but to which I shall
                    not be able to do justice, because I am so bound and fettered by the chain of my
                    narrative? What an idea of weakness it conveys of an author who talks of "the
                    thread of his narrative!" I even used to feel it when I was in the diplomatic
                    service, and received a severe "wigging" once for writing in one of my
                    despatches, "My lord, I have the honour to resume the 'tape' of my narrative"—so
                    wedded is the Foreign Office to the traditions of its own peculiar style. I was
                    glad afterwards they kept me to "the thread," as when I wanted finally to break
                    it I found no difficulty. By the way, after I have done with society, I am going
                    to take up the departments of the public service. If I let them alone just now,
                    it is only because I am so desperately in love, and my love is so desperately
                    hopeless; and the whole thing is in such a mess, that one mess is enough. At
                    present I am setting my dwelling-house in order. When that is done I will go to
                    work to clean out the "offices."

I may also allude here to another somewhat embarrassing circumstance which, had I
                    not the good of my fellow-creatures at heart, might interfere with the progress
                    of my narrative; and this is the morbid satisfaction which it seems to afford
                    some people to claim for themselves the credit of being the most disagreeable or
                    unworthy of those individuals with whom I am at present in contact. They would
                    pretend, for instance, that there is no such person in society as Spiffington
                    Goldtip, but that I mean him to represent some one else; and they take the
                    'Court Guide,' and find that no Lady Broadhem lives in Grosvenor Square, so they
                    suppose that she too stands for some one else who does. Now, if I hear much of
                    this sort of thing I shall stop altogether. In the first place, neither Spiffy
                    nor Lady Broadhem will like it; and in the second, it is very disagreeable to me
                    to be supposed to caricature my acquaintances under false names. The cap is made
                    a great deal too large to fit any particular individual, so there is no use in
                    trying it on; but when, perchance, I find groups of people acting unworthily, I
                    should be falling into the same error for which I blame the parsonic body of the
                    present day, if I shrank from exposing and cutting straight into the sores that
                    they are fain to plaster and conceal. In these days of amateur preaching in
                    theatres and other unconsecrated buildings, I feel I owe no apology to my
                    clerical brethren for taking their congregations in hand after they have quite
                    done with them.
People may call me a "physician" or any other name they like, and tell me to heal
                    myself; but it is quite clear that a sick physician who needs rest, and yet
                    devotes all his time and energies to the curing of his neighbours, is a far more
                    unselfish individual than one who waits to do it till he is robust. Therefore,
                    if I am caught doing myself the very things I find fault with in others, "that
                    has nothing at all to do with it," as Lady Broadhem always says when all her
                    arguments are exhausted.
Those of my readers who have taken an interest in her ladyship's speculations and
                    in my endeavours to extricate her from her pecuniary embarrassments, may
                    conceive our feelings upon hearing of the surrender of General Lee. I regret to
                    say that, in spite of every device which the experience of Spiffy, of Lady
                    Broadhem's lawyer, and of Lady B. herself could suggest, her liabilities have
                    increased to such an extent in consequence of the rapid fall of Confederate
                    stock, that I was obliged to take advantage of the Easter recess to run over to
                    Ireland to make arrangements for selling an extremely encumbered estate which I
                    purchased as a speculation some years ago, but have never before visited. This
                    trip has given me an opportunity of enabling me thoroughly to master the Irish
                    question. I need scarcely say how much I was surprised at the prosperous
                    condition of the peasants of Connemara after the accounts I had received of
                    them. When I "surveyed" my own estate, which consists of seven miles of
                    uninterrupted rock, I regarded with admiration the population who could find the
                    means of subsistence upon it, and whose rags were frequently of a very superior
                    quality. I also felt how creditable it was to the British Government, that by a
                    judicious system of legislation it should succeed in keeping people
                    comparatively happy and contented, whose principal occupation seemed to me to
                    consist in wading about the sea-beach looking for sea-weed, and whose diet was
                    composed of what they found there. That every Irishman I met should expect me to
                    lament with him the decrease by emigration in the population of a nation which
                    subsists chiefly on peat and periwinkles, illustrated in a striking manner the
                    indifference which the individuals of this singular race have for each other's
                    sufferings; and it is quite a mistake, therefore, to suppose that absentee
                    landlords, who are for the most part Irish, live away from their properties
                    because they are so susceptible to the sight of distress that they cannot bear
                    to look upon their own tenantry. To an Englishman nothing is more consoling than
                    to feel that the Irish question is essentially an Irish question, and that
                    Englishmen have nothing at all to do with it—that the tenant-right question is
                    one between Irish landlords and Irish tenants—that the religious question is one
                    between Irish Catholics and Irish Protestants—and that the reason that no
                    Englishman can understand them is, because they are Irish, and inverted brains
                    would be necessary to their comprehension. These considerations impressed
                    themselves forcibly upon my notice at a meeting of the National League, which I
                    attended in Dublin, the object of which was to secure the national independence
                    of Ireland, and to free it from the tyranny of British rule. One of the speakers
                    made out so strong a case for England, that I could only account for it by the
                    fact that he was an Irishman arguing the case of his own country. "How," he
                    asked, "is the English Parliament to know our grievances, when out of 105
                    members that we send up to it, there are not two who are honest? Why is not the
                    O'Donoghue in the chair to-day? he is the only real patriot, and we can't trust
                    him. Why are the Irish Protestants not true to themselves and the cause? Why, in
                    fact, is there not a single man of the smallest position and influence either on
                    the platform or in the body of the house, except myself, who am a magistrate of
                    the county of Cork, and therefore unable to advocate those violent measures by
                    which alone our liberties are to be gained? Is it because we have got them
                    already? No; but because Irishmen do not care a farthing about them. Shame on
                    them for their apathy," etc. It was pleasant to listen to this Irish patriot
                    inveighing against his countrymen, and finally making England responsible for
                    Irishmen being what they are. Bless them! my heart warmed towards them as I saw
                    them at Queenstown trooping on board an emigrant-ship, looking ruddy and
                    prosperous, bound on the useful errand of propagating Fenianism, of exhibiting
                    themselves as choice specimens of an oppressed nationality, and of devoting
                    their brilliant political instincts, their indefatigable industry, and their
                    judicial calmness, to the service of that country which is at present in danger
                    of suffering from a determination of blood to the head in the person of Andy
                    Johnson. If anything can trim that somewhat crank craft "United States," let us
                    hope that it will be by taking in Irishmen at the rate of one thousand per week
                    to serve as ballast; for most certainly the best means of increasing the sailing
                    qualities of the leaky old tub, "British Constitution," will be by inducing the
                    ballast aforesaid to throw itself overboard. I was pitching and rolling
                    abominably between Kingston and Holyhead as I drew this appropriate nautical
                    parallel, and was not in a mood to relish the following announcement, which
                    appeared in the pages of a fashionable organ, that happened to be the first
                    journal I bought in England:—
"We are in a position to state that a marriage is arranged between Lord Frank
                    Vanecourt, M.P., second son of the late Duke of Dunderhead, and Lady Ursula
                    Newlyte, eldest daughter of the late Earl of Broadhem."
How I envied "our position," and what a very different one mine was! However, the
                    notice served its purpose, for it prepared me for what I should have to
                    encounter in London—the sort of running fire of congratulation I must expect to
                    undergo all along Piccadilly, down St James's Street, and along Pall Mall.
                    Should I simper a coy admission, or storm out an indignant denial? On the whole,
                    the most judicious line seemed to be to do each alternately. The prospect of
                    puzzling the gossip-mongers generally almost consoled me for the feeling of
                    extreme annoyance which I had experienced. "The imbroglio must clear itself at
                    last," thought I, "but it will be a curious amusement to see how long I can keep
                    it from doing so;" and I bought an evening paper as I approached London, by way
                    of distracting my mind. The first news which thrilled me as I opened it was the
                    announcement of the assassination of President Lincoln. I am not going to
                    moralise on this event now, and only allude to it as it affects the story of my
                    own life. It saved me that evening from the embarrassment I had anticipated; for
                    even when I went to the Cosmopolitan, I found everybody listening to Mr Wog, so
                    that nobody cared about my private affairs, and it induced Lady Broadhem to make
                    a secret expedition into the City of a speculative nature next morning, as I
                    accidentally discovered from Spiffy. It is not impossible that the knowledge of
                    this breach of faith on her part may prove a valuable piece of information to
                    me.
I sauntered into "the Piccadilly" on the following afternoon, armed at all
                    points, and approached the bay-window, in which I observed Broadhem and several
                    others seated round the table, with the utmost insouciance. They had evidently just talked my matter over, for my
                    appearance caused a momentary pause, and then a general chorus of greeting.
                    Broadhem, with an air of charming naïveté and brotherly
                    regard, almost rushed into my arms; but his presence restrained that general
                    expression of frank opinion on the part of the rest of the company, with
                    reference to my luck, with which the fortunate fiancé is
                    generally greeted. Still, the characters of my different so-called "friends,"
                    and their forms of congratulation, were amusing to watch. There was the
                    patronising, rather elderly style—"My dear Vanecourt, I can't tell you how happy
                    the news has made me. I was just saying to Broadhem,"—and so on; then the free
                    and easy "Frank, old fellow" and "slap on the back" style; then the "knowing
                    shot" and "poke in the ribs" style; then the "feelings too much for me"
                    style—severe pressure of the hands, and silence, accompanied by upturned eyes;
                    then the "serious change of state and heavy responsibilities" style. Oh, I know
                    them all, and am thankful to say the peculiar versatility of my talents enabled
                    me to give as many different answers as there are styles. I am not such a fool
                    as not to know exactly what all my friends said of the match behind my back:
                    "Sharp old woman, Lady Broadhem; she'll make that flat, Frank Vanecourt, pay all
                    the Broadhem debts;" or, "Odd thing it is that such a nice girl as Ursula
                    Newlyte should throw herself away on such a maniac as Frank Vanecourt;" then,
                    "Oh, she'd marry anybody to get away from such a mother;" again, "I always
                    thought Vanecourt a fool, but I never supposed he would have deliberately
                    submitted to be bled by the Broadhems." That is the sort of thing that will go
                    on with variations in every drawing-room in London for the next few evenings.
                    Now I am striking out quite a new line to meet the humbug, the hypocrisy, the
                    scandal, and the ill-nature of which both Ursula and myself are the subjects.
                    Thus, when Broadhem greeted me in the presence of the company, after I had
                    received their congratulations with a good deal of ambiguous embarrassment, I
                    appeared to be a little overcome, and, linking my arm in that of my future
                    brother-in-law, walked him out of the room. "My dear Broadhem," said I, "for
                    reasons which it is not necessary for me now to enter into, but which are
                    connected with the pecuniary arrangements I am making to put your family matters
                    straight, this announcement is a most unfortunate occurrence—we must take
                    measures to contradict it immediately."
"Why," said Broadhem, "if it is the case, as you know it is, I don't see the harm
                    of announcing it. To tell you the truth, I think it ought to have been announced
                    sooner, and that you have been putting Ursula lately in rather a false position,
                    by seeming to avoid her so much in society, because, you know, it has been
                    talked of for some time past."
"Ah, then, I fancy the announcement was made on your authority," I said. "It is a
                    pity, as I had made up my mind to postpone the ceremony until I had not only
                    completed all my arrangements for putting your family matters square, but could
                    actually see my way towards gradually clearing off the more pressing liabilities
                    with which the estate is encumbered. You know what a crotchety fellow I am. Now,
                    my plan is, clear everything off first, and marry afterwards; and unless you
                    positively contradict the report of my marriage with your sister, I shall
                    immediately countermand the instructions under which my lawyers are acting, and
                    take no further steps whatever in the matter." I felt a malicious pleasure in
                    watching Broadhem's face during this speech, as I was sure that he had done his
                    best to spread the report of my marriage with his sister for fear of my backing
                    out, and escaping from my obligations in respect to his financial
                    embarrassments. It is only fair to him to state, that these were none of his own
                    creating—he had been a perfect model of steadiness all his life. "It will be
                    pleasanter for us both," I went on, "that the world should never be able to say,
                    after my marriage with your sister, that you and your mother continue to live
                    upon us. Now, I tell you fairly, that, for family reasons, this premature
                    announcement renders it impossible for me to proceed with those arrangements
                    which must precede my connection with your family."
Broadhem's face grew very long while he listened to this speech. "But," he said,
                    "it is not fair to Ursula that everybody should suppose that you are engaged to
                    her, and refuse to acknowledge it."
"Pray, whose fault is it," said I, "that anybody supposes anything about it? I
                    have never told a soul that I was engaged to be married, and if you and your
                    mother choose to go spreading unauthorised reports, you must take the
                    consequences; but"—and a sudden inspiration flashed upon me—"I will tell you
                    what I will do, I will be guided entirely by Lady Ursula's wishes in the matter.
                    If she wishes the report contradicted, I must insist most peremptorily on both
                    Lady Broadhem and yourself taking the necessary steps to stop the public gossip;
                    but if she is willing that the marriage should be announced, I pledge you my
                    word that I will allow no preconceived plans to influence me, or pecuniary
                    difficulties to stand in the way, but will do whatever she, your mother, and
                    yourself wish."
"Very well," said Broadhem, "that sounds fair enough. I'll go and see Ursula at
                    once."
"Not quite so fast; please take me with you," I said. "As it is a matter most
                    closely affecting my future happiness, I must be present at the interview, and
                    so must Lady Broadhem."
"I don't think that is an arrangement which will suit Ursula at all. In fact,
                    both she and my mother are so incomprehensible and mysterious, that I am sure
                    they will object to any such meeting. Whenever I have spoken to my mother about
                    it, she always meets me with, 'For goodness' sake, don't breathe a word to
                    Ursula, or you will spoil all;' and when, in defiance of this injunction, I did
                    speak to Ursula, she said, in a lackadaisical way, that she had no intention of
                    marrying any one at present; and when I went on to say that in that case she had
                    no business to accept you, she asked me what reason I had for supposing that she
                    ever had done so; and when I said, 'the assurance of my mother's ears in the
                    drawing-room at Dickiefield,' she stared at me with amazement, and burst into a
                    flood of tears."
"Under these circumstances, don't you think you would have done better not to
                    meddle in the matter at all?" I remarked. "However, the mischief is done now,
                    and perhaps the best plan will be for you to bring about a meeting between your
                    sister and myself. I suppose whatever we arrange will satisfy you and Lady
                    Broadhem?"
"Well, I don't know," said Broadhem, doubtfully; "she does not seem to know her
                    own mind, and I don't feel very sure of you. However, you are master of the
                    situation, and can arrange what you like. My mother is going to a May meeting at
                    Exeter Hall to-morrow to hear Caribbee Islands and Chundango hold forth. I know
                    the latter is to call for her at eleven, so if you will come at half-past, I
                    will take care that you have an opportunity of seeing Ursula alone."
This conversation took place as we were strolling arm-in-arm down St James's
                    Street on our way to the House, thereby enabling the groups of our friends who
                    inspected us from divers club-windows to assert confidently the truth of the
                    report.
Just as I was parting from Broadhem at the door of the lobby we were accosted
                    suddenly by Grandon. He looked very pale as he grasped my hand and nodded to my
                    companion, who walked off towards "another place" without waiting for a further
                    greeting. "I suppose, now that your marriage is publicly announced, Frank, it
                    need no longer be a tabooed subject between us, and that you will receive my
                    congratulations."
My first impulse was to assure him that the announcement was unauthorised so far
                    as I was concerned, but the prospect of the impending interview with Ursula
                    restrained me, and I felt completely at a loss. "Don't you think, Grandon," I
                    said, "that I should have told you as much as gossip tells the public, had I
                    felt myself entitled to do so? I only ask you to trust me for another
                    twenty-four hours, and I will tell you everything."
Grandon looked stern. "You are bound not to allow the report to go one moment
                    uncontradicted if there is nothing in it; and if there is, you are now equally
                    bound to acknowledge it."
"Surely," I said, in rather a piqued tone, "Broadhem is as much interested in the
                    matter as you are, and he is satisfied with my conduct."
"I tell you fairly I am not," said Grandon. "You will do Lady Ursula a great
                    injustice, and yourself a great injury, if you persist in a course which is
                    distinctly dishonourable."
At that moment who should come swaggering across the lobby where we happened to
                    be standing but Larkington and Dick Helter! "Well, Frank, when is it to be?"
                    said the latter. "You were determined to take the world by surprise, and I must
                    congratulate you on your success."
"Thanks," said I, calmly, for I was smarting under Grandon's last words: "the day
                    is not yet fixed. What between Lady Broadhem's scruples about Lent and some
                    arrangements I had to make in Ireland, there has been a good deal of delay, but
                    I think," I went on, with a slight simper, "that it has nearly come to an
                    end."
"There," said I to Grandon, when they had favoured me with a few banalités, and passed on, "that is explicit enough,
                    surely; will that satisfy you, or do you like this style better?" and I turned
                    to receive Bower and Scraper, who generally hunt tufts and scandal in couples,
                    and were advancing towards us with much empressement.
"My dear Lord Frank, charmed to see you; no wonder you are looking beaming, for
                    you are the luckiest man in London," said Bower.
"How so?" said I, looking unconscious.
"Come, come," said Scraper, and he winked at me respectfully; "we have known all
                    about it for the last two months. I got it out of Lord Broadhem very early in
                    the day."
"Then you got a most deliberate and atrocious fabrication, for I suppose you mean
                    the report of my marriage to his sister, and I beg you will contradict it most
                    emphatically whenever you hear it," said I, very stiffly. And I walked on into
                    the House, leaving Grandon more petrified than the two little toadies I had
                    snubbed. I can generally listen to Gladstone when he is engaged in keeping the
                    House in suspense over the results of his arithmetical calculations; but the
                    relative merits of a reduction of the tax on tea and on malt fell flat on my
                    ears that evening, and even the consideration of twopence in the pound off the
                    income-tax failed to exercise that soothing influence on my mind which it seemed
                    to produce on those around. I looked in vain for Grandon; his accustomed seat
                    remained empty, and I felt deeply penitent and miserable. What is there in my
                    nature that prompts me, when I am trying to act honestly and nobly, to be
                    impracticable and perverse? Grandon could not know the extent of the
                    complication in which I am involved, and was right in saying what he did; yet I
                    could no more at the moment help resenting it as I did, than a man in a passion
                    who is struck can help returning the blow. Then the fertility and readiness of
                    invention which the demon of perverseness that haunts me invariably displays,
                    fairly puzzles me. And you too, I thought, as I looked up and saw little Scraper
                    whispering eagerly to Dick Helter, who was regarding me with a bewildered look,
                    quite unconscious that the Chancellor of the Exchequer had become poetical in
                    regard to rags, and was announcing that we were about
"To serve as model for the mighty world, 
And be the fair beginning of a time," 
—"ah," thought I, as I gazed on that brilliant and ingenious orator, "he is the
                    only man in the House, who, if he was in such a mess as I am, would find a way
                    out of it."
My first impulse on the following morning, before going to Grosvenor Square, was
                    to go and apologise to Grandon; and I had an additional reason for doing so
                    after reading the following paragraph in the 'Morning Post':—
"The Earl and Countess of Whitechapel had the honour of entertaining at dinner
                    last night the Marquess and Marchioness of Scilly, the Countess (Dowager) of
                    Broadhem, the Earl of Broadhem and Lady Ursula Newlyte, Mr and Lady Jane Helter,
                    Lord Grandon, the Honourable Spiffington Goldtip, and Mr Scraper."
To have made it thoroughly unlucky I ought to have been there as a thirteenth. As
                    it is, I wonder what conclusion the company in general arrived at in reference
                    to the affair in which I am so nearly interested, and I told them off in the
                    order in which they must have gone in to dinner. The Scillys and Whitechapels
                    paired off; Helter took down old Lady Broadhem; Broadhem took Lady Jane;
                    Grandon, Lady Ursula; and Spiffy and Scraper brought up the rear. I pictured the
                    delight with which Helter would mystify Lady Broadhem, by allowing her to
                    extract from him what he had heard first from me and then from Scraper, and how
                    Spiffy and Scraper would each pretend to have the right version of the story,
                    and be best informed on this important matter. All this was easy enough, but my
                    imagination failed to suggest what probably passed between Grandon and Ursula;
                    so I screwed up my courage and determined to go up to Grandon's room and find
                    out We often used to breakfast together, and I sent up my servant to tell him to
                    expect me. Under the circumstances I thought it right to give him the
                    opportunity of refusing to see me, but I knew him too well to think that he
                    would take advantage of it.
He was sitting at his writing-table looking pale and haggard, as I entered, and
                    turned wearily towards me with an air of reserve very foreign to his nature.
"My dear Grandon," I said, "I have come to apologise to you for my unjustifiable
                    conduct yesterday, but you cannot conceive the worry and annoyance to which I
                    have been subject by the impertinent curiosity and unwarrantable interference of
                    the world in my private affairs. When you told me I was acting dishonourably, an
                    impulse of petulance made me forget what was due to Ursula, and answer my
                    inquisitive friends as I did; but I am on my way to Grosvenor Square now, and
                    will put matters straight in an hour."
"The mischief is done," said Grandon, gloomily, "and it is not in your power to
                    undo it. Whatever may have been the motives by which you have been actuated—and
                    far be it from me to judge them—you have caused an amount of misery which must
                    last as long as those whom you have chosen as your victims live."
"I beseech you be more explicit," I said; "what happened last night?—I insist
                    upon knowing."
"You know perfectly well that as you stand in no nearer relation to Lady Ursula
                    than I do," and Grandon's voice trembled, while his eye gleamed for a second
                    with a flash of triumph, "you have no right to insist upon anything; but I have
                    no objection to tell you that as Lady Ursula was quite in ignorance of any such
                    report having currency as that which has now received a certain stamp of
                    authority, by virtue of the conspiracy into which you seem to have entered with
                    her mother and brother, she was overwhelmed with confusion at the
                    congratulations which it seems the ladies heaped upon her after dinner last
                    night, and finally fainted. Of course all London will be talking of it to-day,
                    as the Helters went away early on purpose to get to Lady Mundane's before
                    Scraper could arrive there with his version of the catastrophe."
"Did she tell you she did not care for me, Grandon?" said I, very humbly.
"She told me to forgive you, and love you as I used to, God help me!" burst out
                    Grandon, and he covered his face with his hands. "Frank," he said, "she is an
                    angel of whom neither you nor I is worthy; but oh, spare her! Don't, for God's
                    sake hold her up to the pity and curiosity of London. I would do anything on
                    earth she told me; but what spell have you thrown over her that in spite of your
                    heartless conduct she should still implore me to love and cherish you? How can I
                    obey her in this when your acts are so utterly at variance with all that is
                    noble and honourable? I have at least one cause for gratitude," he continued, in
                    a calmer tone, "and that is, that the doubt which would force itself upon me
                    when I vainly tried to account for her conduct in accepting you so suddenly has
                    been removed."
I had discovered what I wanted, for in spite of every effort to conceal it, I
                    detected a mixture of jealousy and of triumph in Grandon's last speech. Ursula,
                    in her moment of agony, had unconsciously allowed him to perceive that he alone
                    was loved, and had urged him still to love and cherish me, because as an
                    irresponsible being she had thought me more than ever in need of sympathy and
                    protection For a moment I wavered in my resolution. Should I open my heart and
                    give my dearest friend a confidence which should justify me in his eyes, at the
                    risk of destroying the project I had formed on that night when, walking home
                    from my interview with Lady Broadhem, I had determined to devote my energies to
                    the happiness of others and not of myself? or should I maintain that flippant,
                    heartless exterior which seemed for the time necessary to the success of my
                    plans? As usual, my mind made itself up while I was doubting what to do, and in
                    spite of myself I said jauntily, "Well, now that you know that she cares about
                    you and not about me, I suppose you have nothing to do but to return her
                    affection?"
"I have done that for some time," he replied, "but you know how perfectly
                    hopeless our love is; and yet," and his voice deepened and his face flushed with
                    enthusiasm, "I am happier loving hopelessly and knowing that I am loved, than I
                    have ever been before. Forgive me, Frank, but I do not feel for you as I should
                    have done had you behaved differently. You had no right to let me suppose that
                    she had accepted you when the subject had never been breathed between you. Your
                    conscience must tell you that you have acted in an unworthy manner towards us
                    both."
"Grandon," I said, sententiously, "my conscience works on a system utterly
                    incomprehensible to an ordinary intelligence, and I am quite satisfied with it.
                    I will have a metaphysical discussion with you on the matter on some other
                    occasion. Meantime you think Ursula has decided on preferring the ruin and
                    disgrace of the Broadhem family to a mariage de
                        convenance either with me or any one else?"
"I did not know it was a question of disgrace," said Grandon, "and I am quite
                    sure that Lady Ursula will do the right thing. I would rather not discuss the
                    subject any further; we shall certainly not agree, and I am afraid that we might
                    become more widely estranged than I should wish. Here is breakfast. It was you
                    who last asked me to bury this unhappy subject, it is my turn now to make the
                    same request. I wish to heaven it had never arisen between us."
"What a lucky fellow you are!" said I, looking at him with the eye of a
                    philosopher; "now you would never imagine yourself to be one of the most
                    enviable men in London, with the most charming of women and the most devoted of
                    friends ready to sacrifice themselves at your feet—she incomprise, I incompris."
"Don't trifle," said Grandon, sternly, interrupting me; "my patience is not
                    inexhaustible."
"Luckily mine is," said I, with my mouth full of grilled salmon, "otherwise I
                    should not be the right stuff for a social missionary. Apropos, you have never
                    asked me what I have been doing in that line; nor told me what you thought of
                    the long letter I wrote you from Flityville. Did you get me the answers to those
                    questions?"
"No," he replied, "I must honestly tell you, Frank, that it pains me to discuss
                    so serious a subject with one who makes so fair and earnest a pretence of having
                    deep convictions as you do, and whose acts are so diametrically opposed to them;
                    and now I must be off, for I have a committee of the House to attend."
"And I a rendezvous of a still more interesting character to keep;" and as I left
                    Grandon I observed a shade of disgust and disappointment cross his face at my
                    last speech. I always overdo it, I thought, as I walked towards Grosvenor
                    Square, but Grandon ought to make allowances for me. He has known me all my
                    life, but it was reserved for us both to be in love with the same woman to bring
                    out the strong points in each of us. Lavater says you never know whether a man
                    is your friend until you have divided an inheritance with him; but it is a much
                    more ticklish thing to go halves in a woman's love. Never mind, I will astonish
                    them both yet. Now then, to begin with her; and I boldly knocked at the door. I
                    found Broadhem in his own little den.
"It is all right," he said, as I entered; "I have told Ursula you are coming, and
                    she will see you in the drawing-room."
I had not been for two minutes alone with Lady Ursula since we parted at
                    Dickiefield; indeed, when it is remembered that my whole intercourse with her
                    upon that occasion extended over little more than twenty-four hours, and that we
                    had never been on any other terms since than those of the most casual
                    acquaintances, the embarrassing nature of the impending interview presented
                    itself to me in a somewhat unpleasant aspect. Now that it had come to the point,
                    I could not make up my mind exactly what to say. I tried to collect my ideas and
                    go over the history of the events which had resulted in the present predicament.
                    Why was I in the singular position of having to make a special appointment with
                    a young lady with whom I was desperately in love, whom I knew but slightly, but
                    who supposed me to be mad, for the purpose of asking her, first, whether she
                    considered herself engaged to be married to me or not; and secondly, if not,
                    whether she would have any objection to the world supposing that such was the
                    case? Now my readers will remember that the sudden impulse which induced me in
                    the first instance to delude Lady Broadhem into believing that Lady Ursula had
                    accepted me, arose from the desire to save her from the tender mercies of
                    Chundango. Lady Ursula had in fact owed the repose she had enjoyed for the last
                    two months entirely to her supposed engagement to me. The moment that is at an
                    end, her fate becomes miserable. If she will but consider herself drowning, and
                    me the straw, I shall only be too happy to be clutched. If I cannot propose
                    myself as a husband, I will at least suggest that she should regard me in the
                    light of a straw.
I had got thus far when I found myself in her presence. She looked very pale, and
                    there was an expression of decision about the corners of her mouth which I had
                    not before remarked. It did not detract from its sweetness, nor did the slight
                    tremor of the upper lip as she greeted me detract from its force. It is a great
                    mistake to suppose that a tremor of the lip denotes weakness; on the contrary,
                    it often arises from a concentration of nervous energy. I am not quite so sure
                    about a tremor of the knees. That was what I suffered from at the moment,
                    together with a very considerable palpitation of the heart. Now the difficulty
                    at such a moment is to know how to begin. I have often heard men say that when
                    they have obtained an interview with a great statesman for the purpose of asking
                    a favour, and he waits for them to begin without helping them out with a word,
                    they have experienced this difficulty. That arises from the consciousness that
                    they are sacrificing their self-respect to their "career." If they would never
                    go near a statesman except when they wanted to confer a favour upon him, they
                    would have no difficulty in finding words. Fortunately the great majority of our
                    public employés are not yet hardened beggars like the
                    Neapolitans, and are not, like them, dead to any sentiment of shame upon these
                    occasions, though it is to be feared that they will soon become so. The
                    responsibility of demoralising the servants of the public lies entirely with the
                    heads of the departments. In proportion as these gentlemen are not ashamed of
                    sacrificing their subordinates in order to keep themselves in office, will those
                    subordinates become as unblushing place-hunters as their masters are
                    place-keepers. Once accustom a man to being a scapegoat, and you destroy at a
                    blow his respect for himself and for the man who offers him up. I could become
                    very eloquent upon this subject, if I was not afraid of keeping Ursula waiting.
                    There are few men who need having their duties pointed out to them more
                    constantly than Cabinet Ministers. Attacks in the House of Commons do them no
                    good, as they are generally the result of party tactics, and spring from as
                    unworthy a motive as does the defence. Men who have got place do not pay much
                    attention to attacks from men who want it. Then, as I said before, the Church
                    utterly ignores its duties in this respect. Who ever heard of a bishop getting
                    up and pointing out to her Majesty's Ministers the necessity of considering the
                    interests of the country before their own? It would be immediately supposed that
                    he was bullying them, because he wanted to be "translated;" and this would be
                    considered the only excuse for the same want of "good taste" which I, who am
                    only desirous for their good, am now displaying. I put it to you, my lords, in
                    all humility, do you ever get up in your places, not in the House of Peers, but
                    in another House, and point out to the rulers of the country that no personal
                    consideration should ever interfere with their doing the right thing at the
                    right moment? Do you ever explain to the noble lords among whom you sit, that
                    when a committee is chosen from both sides of the House to inquire into a simple
                    question of right or wrong, the members of it are bound to vote upon its merits
                    and according to their consciences, rather than according to the political
                    parties to which they belong? and do you ever ask yourselves what you would do
                    in the same circumstances? Do you ever tell the heads of departments that they
                    are responsible for the morale which pervades the special
                    services over which they preside? that the tone of honour, the amount of zeal
                    and of disinterestedness which subordinates display must depend in a great
                    measure upon the example set them by their chief? that you can no more expect an
                    orchestra to play in tune with a leader devoid of a soul for music, than a
                    department to work well without the soul of honour at its head? Do you ever tell
                    the leaders of the party with which you "act" that it is wicked openly to
                    collect funds to give candidates to bribe with at general elections? Do you ever
                    faithfully tell these great men, that just in proportion as their position is
                    elevated, so is their power for good or for evil? and when you see their
                    responsibilities sit lightly upon them, do you ever take them to task for
                    trifling with the highest interests of the country, and stifling the consciences
                    of its servants? If the fact that in your ecclesiastical capacity you are
                    beholden to one or other of the political parties makes it delicate for you to
                    attack your opponents, then let the Liberal Episcopacy jealously guard the
                    honour of the Liberal Cabinets, and the Tory bishops watch over the public
                    morality of their own side so soon as it shall come into office.
Of course I was not thinking of all this as I entered the drawing-room, but I had
                    thought it often before, and feel impelled to mention it now. What I actually
                    did was to blush a good deal, stammer a good deal, and finally make the
                    unpleasant discovery that that presence of mind which my readers will ere this
                    have perceived I possess to an eminent degree, had entirely deserted me. I think
                    this arose from the extreme desire I felt that Lady Ursula should not at that
                    moment imagine that I was mad. Perhaps, my reader, it may have happened to you
                    to have to broach the most delicate of all topics to a young lady who regarded
                    you in the light of a rather dangerous lunatic, and you can therefore enter into
                    my feelings. I was not sorry to find myself blushing and stammering, as it might
                    have the effect of reassuring her, and making her feel that for the moment at
                    least I was quite harmless.
"I am glad, Lord Frank," she said, observing my confusion, "that you have given
                    me this opportunity of seeing you, as I am sure you would not willingly inflict
                    pain, and should you find that you have unintentionally done so, will make all
                    the reparation in your power."
At this moment I glanced significantly at Broadhem, who left the room.
"Unfortunately it too often happens, Lady Ursula," I said, "that it is necessary
                    to inflict a temporary pain to avert what might become a permanent misery."
"I cannot conceive," replied she, "to what permanent misery, as affecting myself,
                    you can allude, in which your intervention should be necessary, more especially
                    when exhibited in a form which places me in such a false position. I need not
                    say that the announcement which I saw for the first time in a newspaper caused
                    me the greatest annoyance; but when I found afterwards that my mother, my
                    brother, and even Lord Grandon, had heard it from your own lips many weeks
                    before, and that in fact you had given my mother, under a promise that she would
                    not allude to the subject to me, such a totally erroneous idea of what passed at
                    our interview at Dickiefield,—when I thought of all this, I could only account
                    for it by the last revelation you made to me there."
She maintained her self-possession perfectly until she was obliged to allude to
                    my insanity, then she dropped her eyelids, and the colour for the first time
                    rushed into her cheeks as she shrank from touching on this delicate subject. At
                    the moment I almost felt inclined to tell her that I was as sane as she was, but
                    refrained, partly because I was not sure of it myself, partly because I did not
                    think she would believe me, partly because, after all, it might be the best
                    justification I could offer for my conduct, and partly because I was not quite
                    ready to enter upon an explanation of the ruse by which I had hoped to save her
                    from the persecution of her mother to marry Chundango. This suddenly reminded me
                    of my idea that she was in the position of one drowning. I therefore said, in a
                    careless way, for the purpose of showing her that her allusion to my insanity
                    had produced no unfavourable impression upon me,——
"Lady Ursula, would you have any objection to regarding me in the light of a
                    straw?"
"A what!" said Lady Ursula, in a tone in which amazement seemed blended with
                    alarm.
"A straw," I repeated; "I assure you you are drowning, and even an unworthy being
                    like myself may be of use to you, if you would but believe it. Remember
                    Chundango's conduct at Dickiefield—remember the view Lady Broadhem took of it,
                    until I interposed, or as I should more accurately say, until the current swept
                    me past her—remember that up to this moment she has never recurred to the
                    subject of Mr Chundango, who, although he comes to the house constantly, now
                    devotes himself entirely to Lady Broadhem herself; and, allow me to say it, you
                    owe it all to a timely straw."
Lady Ursula seemed struck by the graphic way in which I put her position before
                    her, and remained silent for a few moments. It had evidently never occurred to
                    her, that I had indirectly been the means of securing her tranquillity. She
                    little thought it possible that her mother could have talked her matrimonial
                    prospects over with a comparative stranger in the mercantile terms which Lady
                    Broadhem had used in our interview at Dickiefield. And I am well aware that
                    society generally would consider such conduct on the part of her ladyship coarse
                    and unladylike. It showed a disregard of les convenances
                    which good society is the first to resent. Those who have never secretly
                    harboured the designs which Lady Broadhem in the agony of a financial crisis
                    avowed, might justly repudiate her conduct; but "conscience does make cowards of
                    us all," and fashionable mothers will naturally be the first to censure in Lady
                    Broadhem a practice to which, in a less glaring and obnoxious form, they are so
                    strongly addicted. If in silvery accents she had confided her projects to Lady
                    Mundane, the world would have considered it natural and ladylike enough; the
                    coarseness consisted in her telling them to me. O generation of slave-owners!
                    why persist in deluding yourselves into the belief, that so long as you buy and
                    sell your own flesh and blood in a whisper there is no harm in it?
My gentle critics, I would strongly advise you not to place me on my defence in
                    these matters; I have every disposition to let you down as gently as possible,
                    but if you play tricks with the rope, I shall have to let you down by the run.
                    Why, it was only last year that all the world went to Mrs Gorgon Tompkins's
                    second ball. They no more cared than she did, that she had lost one of her
                    daughters early in the season, just after she had given the first. I remember
                    Spiffy Goldtip taking public opinion in the club about it, and asking whether an
                    interval of four months was not enough to satisfy the requirements of society in
                    the matter, as it would be so sad if, after having made such good social running
                    before Easter, Mrs Gorgon Tompkins were to lose it all afterwards through an
                    unfortunate domestic contretemps of this kind. Now I
                    doubt whether Lady Broadhem could surpass that. However, she is capable of great
                    feats, and I fully expect she will strike out a new line soon; there has been a
                    lurking demon in her eye of late which alarms me. Fortunately I am not yet
                    finally committed, financially. It is true it has cost me a few thousands, which
                    I shall never see again, to tide the family over its difficulties thus far, but
                    I can still let it down with a crash if it suits me.
"Lord Frank," said Lady Ursula, after a pause, "I have already alluded to the
                    circumstance which has induced me to treat you with a forbearance which I could
                    not have extended to one whom I regarded as responsible for conduct
                    unwarrantable towards myself, and certainly not to be justified by any possible
                    advantage which I might be supposed to derive from it. I consented to see you
                    now, because I feel sure that when you know from my own lips that I wish you at
                    once to deny the rumour you have been the means of originating, I may depend
                    upon your doing so."
"May I ask," I said, with much contrition in my tone, "what explanation you gave
                    Lady Broadhem on the subject?"
"If you mean," said Lady Ursula, "whether I accounted to mamma for your conduct
                    as I do to myself—in other words, whether I betrayed your secret—I have
                    carefully refrained from discussing the subject with her. Fortunately, after
                    dinner at the Whitechapels' last night, Broadhem told me that he had seen you,
                    and that you were coming here to-day, so I assured mamma that she would hear
                    from you the true state of the case; though, of course, I felt myself bound to
                    let her understand that, owing to a fact which I was unable to explain, she had
                    been completely misled by you."
"And what did Lady Broadhem say?" I asked.
"She said that had it not been for a meeting she was obliged to attend this
                    morning, she would have waited to see you to-day; but that she was sure I
                    laboured under some strange delusion, and that a few words of explanation from
                    you would smooth everything."
"Will you allow me to tell you what those few words are?" said I. "Lady Broadhem
                    little imagines the real state of the case, because she knows what you do not
                    know, that I am engaged in clearing off her own pecuniary liabilities, and
                    making arrangements by which the old-standing claims on the Broadhem estates may
                    be met. You may never have heard how seriously the family is embarrassed, and
                    how unlucky all Lady Broadhem's attempts to retrieve its fortunes by speculation
                    have been. I could only account to her for the pecuniary sacrifices she knows I
                    am making by allowing her to suppose that I was incurring them for your sake." I
                    could not resist letting a certain tone of pique penetrate this speech, and the
                    puzzled and pained expression of Lady Ursula's face afforded me a sense of
                    momentary gratification, of which I speedily repented. As she looked at me
                    earnestly, her large blue eyes filled slowly with tears. "Is she crying because
                    this last speech of mine proves me hopelessly mad?" thought I; "or does she feel
                    herself in a pecuniary trap, and is she crying because she does not see her way
                    out of it?" and I felt the old sensation coming over me, and my head beginning
                    to swim. Why, oh why, am I denied that method in my madness which it must be
                    such a comfort to possess? It is just at the critical moment that my osseous
                    matter invariably plays me a trick. I seemed groping for light and strength, and
                    mechanically put out my hand; the soft touch of one placed gently in it thrilled
                    through my nerves with an indescribable current, and instantaneously the horrid
                    feeling left me, and I emerged from the momentary torpor into which I had
                    fallen. I don't think Ursula remarked it, for she said, and her eyes were now
                    overflowing, in a voice of surpassing sweetness, "Lord Frank, I have discovered
                    your real secret; it is no longer possible for you to
                    conceal the noble motives which have actuated you under your pretended——"
"Hush!" I said, interrupting her; "what I did, whether rightly or wrongly, I did
                    for the best. Now I will be guided by your wishes. What am I to do?"
"Allow no worldly consideration, however unselfish, either for myself or those
                    dearest to me, to induce you to swerve from the course which truth and honour
                    distinctly point out. Whatever may seem to be the consequences, we are both
                    bound to follow this, and we have but to feel that, if need be, we are ready to
                    make great sacrifices to receive the requisite faith and strength. Believe me,"
                    she concluded, and her voice trembled slightly, "whatever happens, I shall feel
                    that you have given me proofs of a friendship upon which I may depend."
I pressed the hand I still held, and I felt the touch was sacred. "Ah," thought
                    I, as I left the room, and was conscious that the gentle influence of her I had
                    parted from was still resting upon me, "that is the right kind of spirit-medium.
                    There is a magnetism in that slender finger which supports and purifies." O my
                    hardened and material readers! don't suppose that because I know you will laugh
                    at the idea of a purifying or invigorating magnetism I shall hesitate to write
                    exactly what I feel on such matters. If I refrain from saying a great deal more,
                    it is not because I shrink from your ridicule but from your ignorance. You may
                    not believe that the pearls exist; I honestly admit that they are not yet in my
                    possession, but I have seen those who own them, and, unfortunately, also I have
                    seen the animals before whom they have been cast. And you, my dear young ladies,
                    do not ignore the responsibility which the influence you are able to exercise
                    over young men imposes upon you. You need not call it magnetism unless you like,
                    but be sure that there is that conveyed in a touch or a glance which elevates or
                    degrades him upon whom it is bestowed, according as you preserve the purity and
                    simplicity of your inmost natures. If you would only regard yourselves in the
                    light of female missionaries to that benighted tribe of lavender-gloved young
                    gentlemen who flutter about you like moths round a candle, you would send them
                    away glowing and happy, instead of singeing their wings. If, when these
                    butterflies come to sip, you would give them honey instead of poison, they would
                    not forsake you as they do now for the gaudy flowers which are too near you. I
                    know what you have to contend against—the scheming mothers who bring you up to
                    the "Daughticultural Show," labelled and decorated, and put up to competition as
                    likely prize-winners—who deliberately expose you to the first rush of your first
                    seasons, and mercilessly watch you as you are swept along by the tearing
                    stream—who see you without compunction cast away on sandbanks of worldliness,
                    where you remain till you become as "hard" and as "fast" as those you find
                    stranded there before you. Here your minds become properly, or rather
                    improperly, opened. You hear, for the first time, to your astonishment, young
                    men talked of by their Christian or nick names—their domestic life canvassed,
                    their eligibility discussed, and the varied personal experiences through which
                    your "hard and fast" friends have passed, related.
Then, better prepared for the rest of the voyage, you start again, and venture a
                    little on your own account. What bold swimmers you are becoming now! How you
                    laugh and defy the rocks and reefs upon which you are ultimately destined to
                    split! Already you look back with surprise to the time when almost everything
                    you heard shocked you. What an immense amount of unnecessary knowledge you have
                    acquired since then, and how recklessly you display it! Do you think it has
                    softened and elevated you? Do you think the moral contact which should be
                    life-giving to those who know you, benefits them?
It is not true, because young men behave heartlessly, that you must flirt "in
                    self-defence," as you call it. When a warfare of this kind once begins, it is
                    difficult to fix the responsibility; but if one side left off, the occupation of
                    the other would be gone. If you want to revenge yourselves on these fickle
                        youths—strike! as they do in the manufacturing
                    districts. Conceive the wholesome panic you would cause, if you combined into
                    "unions" like the working-classes, and every girl in London bound herself not to
                    flirt for the entire season!
Unless you do something of this kind soon, you will reverse the whole system of
                    nature. The men will be the candles and you the moths; they will be the flowers,
                    and you the butterflies. If all the brothers in London persist in trying to
                    imitate their sisters, and all the sisters ape their brothers, what a nice
                    confusion we shall arrive at! The reason I preach to you and not to them now,
                    is, because I think I have a better chance with the mind of a masculine young
                    woman than with that of a feminine young man. If you only knew what a comfort it
                    would be to talk sense instead of that incessant chaff, you would read a little
                    more. I don't object to your riding in the Park—the abominable constitution of
                    society makes it almost the only opportunity of seeing and talking to those you
                    like without being talked about; but you need not rush off for a drive in the
                    carriage immediately after lunch, just because you are too restless to stay at
                    home.
First, the Park and young men, then lunch, then Marshall and Snelgrove, then tea
                    and young men again, then dinner, drums, and balls, and young men till three A.M. That is the tread-wheel you have chosen to turn
                    without the smallest profit to yourself or any one else. If I seem to speak
                    strongly, it is because my heart yearns over you. I belonged once to the
                    lavender-gloved tribe myself, and though I have long since abandoned the
                    hunting-grounds of my youth, I would give the world to see them happy and
                    innocent. Moreover, I know you too well to imagine that I have written a word
                    which will offend you. Far from it. We shall be warmer and closer friends ever
                    after; but I am strongly afraid mamma will disapprove. She will call
                    'Piccadilly' "highly improper," and say that it is a book she has not allowed
                    any of "her girls" to read. I don't want to preach disobedience; but there are
                    modes well known to my fair young friends of reading books which mamma forbids,
                    and I trust that they will never read one against her wish which may leave a
                    more injurious impression upon their minds than 'Piccadilly.'

