
CHAPTER VI THERE GLOOM THE DARK BROAD SEAS
The Earl's emotion in concluding his narrative made the last sentence almost
      inaudible. Glanville would have liked to inquire whether Colonel Valence was still living, and
      in what part of the world. But he refrained, seeing how deeply Lord Trelingham was moved.
      After some time, the latter said, with an effort, 'That is the story, and now what plan do you
      suggest? How are we to deal with the picture?'
'It is almost impossible to say,' he replied. 'Were it merely a question of painting, I
      could perhaps, on my own judgment, attempt to restore the general effect, if Lady May would
      kindly sit to me for the Madonna. Peculiar as the style is, I might do something. But to
      restore the canvas I must call in a friend who is more at home in the miraculous. I mentioned
      him last night, Lady May. He has a bizarre sort of name —Ivor Mardol.'

'Oh, that is Ivor Mardol,' replied the lady; 'well, call him in. My father is not likely to
      object.'
'No, I am sure,' said Glanville; 'but my friend—I should find it hard to describe him. It is
      his pleasure not to be clothed in soft garments nor to dwell in kings' houses. He is extremely
      unconventional, and being in manners and education far more than a workman, and refusing to be
      called a gentleman, it would be no easy task to find, in a house like this, the niche that
      would suit him.'
'What is he then by profession?' inquired Lord Trelingham.
'An engraver,' replied Glanville; 'but he works for himself, not for a firm or a newspaper.
      He is well enough off; lives in his own little house in a street near Charing Cross, which he
      has made as quaint and suggestive of the artistic life as any workshop in the time of Quentin
      Matsys or Albert Dürer; and is, in short, a quiet, large-minded, quick-eyed young man,
      acquainted not only with his own branch of study, but with painting and painters, and the
      history of art since the Egyptians, if they began it. He will sometimes condescend to stay
      with me, though seldom. He lives in his work and the studies to which it leads him. Odd and
      out-of-the-way society he likes, and has friends very low down in the depths. I should think
      he has never seen the inside of a drawing-room, except in a picture.'
'What a delightfully fresh being you describe!' said Lady May; 'you must persuade him to
      come to
       us. We will excuse him from attendance in the drawing-room. We will fit him up a
      hermitage in the Park, or assign him a lodging in the tower. But he must come to us, though we
      should have to employ stratagem.'
'My dear May,' said the Earl, 'you let your fancies run away with you. Of course, if Mr.
      Glanville thinks his friend would come, and that his knowledge could help us to restore Lady
      Elizabeth's portrait, there could be no difficult in letting him follow his own way of life
      while staying here.'
'What I was thinking,' said Glanville, 'is, that if he saw the Madonna he could tell us
      whether a replica of it is anywhere to be met. Or, indeed, without seeing it he might. On the
      other hand, should it be necessary to attempt its restoration, I could have no more skilful
      assistant. The one thing for which I should, in that case, stipulate, would be, as you kindly
      say, Lord Trelingham, that he might be suffered to live in his own way.'
'But there is really a hermitage in the Park,' said Lady May; 'an attempt at an Alpine
      cottage, just large enough to hold one person and his brushes, if he happened to be an artist.
      It stands on an islet in the river, screened from observation by wooded heights, and is off
      the paths in the Chase. It is not far either.'
'That sounds enticing,' said Glanville. 'I cannot see my way without Ivor Mardol; and, if
      your lordship agrees'—he turned to Lord Trelingham—'I will acquaint him with the
      proposal.'

'By all means,' said the Earl.
'And he shall have the Hermitage,' said Lady May, 'and as much solitude as he chooses.'
'I cannot be sure,' said Glanville thoughtfully, 'that you will like him; description goes
      for so little. He is bright, unworldly spirit, but reserved to excess when not among intimate
      friends.'
'Is he married?' inquired the lady.
'Not that I am aware,' said Glanville, with a smile; 'but that is one of the points on which
      he would be most reserved, if the whim seized him. I know nothing of his relations or
      surroundings beyond what I see. Nor, though we have been friends since we were at school, has
      he uttered a syllable respecting them. However, personal talk was never a characteristic of
      Ivor Mardol. His mind is given elsewhere. For a man not yet thirty, he is marvellously staid
      and self-contained.'
'You describe an interesting, almost a romantic personage,' said Lady May. 'We must hope he
      will not be deaf to your persuasions.' And so the matter dropped. Nothing more could be done
      till the 'almost romantic personage' had been consulted. The portrait of Lady Elizabeth was
      taken away. In its stead, the curtain which had hung there before was put up for the time
      being; and when Tom Davenant came from his equine studies, he found that his strong arm was
      not to be called into requisition, but only the brains of Ivor Mardol, described as 'something
      between a workman and a gentleman.'
       Tom lifted his eyebrows slightly. 'What kind of cross is that?' he inquired of
      the Earl. 'I don't think those half-breeds usually turn out well.' But I must do him the
      justice to remark that he spoke in a professional and abstract point of view, and not with
      contempt for the 'half-breed.' Tom despised nobody. But he liked the distinction of races to
      be kept. As he said now and then with the succinct wisdom which sat so well upon him, 'You
      can't get an Arab out of a cart-horse.'
I have no intention of chronicling the luncheons and dinners that were eaten at Trelingham
      during those eventful days. My reader must imagine them, with the dull or brilliant
      conversation which served as their intellectual garnish; and he may as well, at the same time,
      picture to himself the amusements or occupations—it was not always easy to distinguish between
      them—which filled up the intervals. The story I have in hand does not concern itself a great
      deal with eating and drinking, nor much with the amusements of the great world; though,
      doubtless, it was entangled in all these threads of the earthly life.
Suppose, then, luncheon over, and Glanville bent on a lonely walk by the sea, in spite of
      the rainclouds and an occasional downpour. He took a delight in wild weather, and found it
      inspiring; nor did it bring to his mind melancholy visions, sad landscapes, or the gloomy
      uncomfortable forebodings which seemed in Lady May to be its accompaniment.
       He liked to live within himself, as he phrased it; and he was never more so than
      when the sky lowered overhead, and the sullen or defiant roar of the waters came, as now, like
      a deafening thunder all round him. Imagine him sauntering along the shingly beach. What had
      been told in the picture-gallery did not keep its grasp on his fancy down here; it served
      merely as an occasion to dream and muse, exciting him as a volume of Spanish ballads might
      have done, with their lingering assonance, their fine heroic clangour, and undercurrent of
      love, disastrous or fortunate. He thought of Lady May, of the Earl, of Lady Alice, much as you
      or I might have thought of them after hearing the story—with interest, and some degree of
      wonder that so romantic an incident should have come athwart the monotonous course of the
      Earl's life; but he felt no deeper emotion. Did he not stand outside their circle? When he had
      restored the wrecked portrait and painted the dining-hall, he should lose sight of Trelingham,
      and the days he was now beginning would roll up like a scroll. He had touched upon many
      another circle, come into the lives of old and young, and gone out of them again. 'What a
      lonely fellow I am!' he said to himself. 'But for Ivor, I should not have a friend, to call a
      friend, in the world.' It was this, perhaps, that drew them together. Ivor seemed to be cut
      off from the sweet companionship of home, and a solitary from childhood, much liked,
      successful in his work, but still—alone. 'And I am alone, too,' repeated
       Glanville. His parents had died when he was just beginning to know them; the
      guardian of his moderate estate had been a man of law, highly conscientious and careful, but
      at no time capable of winning his ward's confidence, and now himself gone the way of all
      flesh. He stood there, the centre of his own universe, solitary but for Ivor.
Thinking thus, the old schooldays came back to him, that careless dreamy time when human
      nature is making the first trial of itself, and a boy looks on at his own deeds and ripening
      qualities with as little concern as though they belonged to a stranger, yet is liable to deep
      and sudden passion, to fits of melancholy and of longing, to pain and disquietude, which
      sometimes leave their mark on him for life. He remembered the springing up of this friendship,
      fast as Jonah's gourd; how it seemed perfect in an hour and had continued ever since. They say
      that only school friendships last. It may be so. At any rate, here was an exchange of mind,
      heart, imagination, of feelings and experience, that had resulted in steadfast devotion and an
      almost passionate rivalry of good offices. Rupert Glanville was proud of the ancient Norse
      blood that ran in his veins; and the name of Ivor Mardol suggested a kindred other than
      English. Both these young men, however, combined a high degree of reserve and stern silence
      with a frankness of sentiment which, among Englishmen, is seldom exhibited—unless in moods
      that express contempt or anger. The explanation perhaps lay in this, that
       they were both, though by no means after the same fashion, artists. Neither of
      them took up the instruments of his calling as a drudgery, but in obedience to an instinct,
      and as a lifelong dedication which no success or increase of fortune would lead him to
      renounce. Brilliant, sociable, and, in a measure, volatile, Rupert had yet never declined the
      hard work of the studio. His own lightness of disposition led him to admire his friend's
      patient philosophy, wide learning, and easy waving aside of the world's good gifts. Rupert had
      a poetic fancy and a heart which, in his secret musings, he confessed was too liable to
      momentary conflagrations. He used to say jestingly that he went to his philosopher to have the
      fire put out. For Mardol, like many gentle persons, had in his nature a fund of austerity. He
      was tenderhearted, but his principles were severe, and he sometimes unwittingly manifested a
      rigour of judgment before which Glanville, though not deeply tarred, like so many young men,
      with the brush of worldliness, was fain to keep back certain of his own frivolities. Except
      for this perhaps venial offence against friendship, he was loyalty itself. The splendid
      success he had achieved in the last three years neither corrupted his heart nor dazzled his
      understanding. He had met none to compare with his schoolboy-friend, and their attachment was
      never so strong as when he thought of persuading Ivor to join him at Trelingham.
He wandered to and fro on the beach considering it. His letter of invitation was not yet
      written;
       indeed, he had chosen this solitary promenade to shape its contents. The
      hermitage and Ivor Mardol living there on fruit and milk, brought him every morning by a
      rustic attendant, with the glades of Trelingham Chase for his outlook, made a pretty picture.
      But to enjoy such solitude, in the neighbourhood of the friends who had bestowed it on him,
      was possible only to a diseased egoist, and Mardol was by no means that. If he came, he would
      wish to acknowledge their kindness in a becoming spirit; and could he be at ease or bring out
      his rare gifts in this too polished society? Would he feel at home? Glanville was not selfish.
      He weighed these things in the balance. But, again, to have his dearest friend with him! And
      why should Ivor, in his proud shyness, or whatever it might be termed, deny himself the
      pleasure of associating with men and women from whom, the moment he was really known to them,
      he would receive an enthusiastic welcome? He must be entreated to come in the name of their
      friendship; for his own good he must be taken in the silken snare. He could not go on for ever
      being a recluse and an outcast from his natural surroundings. He had been so too long. It was
      all very well to begin with a healthy scorn of drawing-rooms and conventionalities—nay, to
      keep a little of it for future occasions; but more than this was cynicism, was not defensible
      in the eyes of reason, and was heroic on the wrong side altogether.
Thus far did Glanville proceed in his meditation
       while the wind kept driving in the waves about his feet, and the flying scud ran
      across the sky, making a chequer of light and dark at once fantastic and impressive. Not
      another human being was in view. Hither and thither went sea-birds on the wing, shrieking out
      their thin music, now dipping into the foam with careless plunge, and now sweeping hastily by
      him to lose themselves in the clouds. There was no boat on the nearer waters; far out on the
      horizon he seemed to descry a vessel that loomed up while he gazed and sank out of sight
      again, giving him the most vivid notion he had ever conceived of a tossing sea and an
      impending shipwreck. He knew the coast was ironbound and perilous; immediately below the reach
      of sand and shingles he was treading a line of sunken rocks was indicated by the foaming and
      wind-beaten surge. But the rain came on harder; it was growing late; and he must return to the
      Court if he would not lose the London post, which left nearly two hours before dinner. He had
      come down by a long winding path; but there was a shorter way through the churchyard. He would
      take that.
Shorter it may have been; steeper it undoubtedly proved. Glanville, in the words of the
       Pilgrim's Progress , 'fell from running to going, and from going to clambering,'
      while he attempted to guide his steps over the huge stones, with slippery tracts of grass and
      prickly heather between them, which composed the main part of the ascent. He was soon out of
      breath, and paused to take in a fresh supply, and look round
       on the view to which he had turned his back, for, like a true artist, he
      regretted leaving it. The scene was unutterably grand. A strange, cold light was coming over
      shore and ocean, bringing out to their smallest detail the crests of the waves, the shining
      sands, the fringe of rocks to right and left, and the runlets in the heathery sides of the
      steep he had been climbing. Between the spectator and the horizon all save this narrow strip
      was raging sea. On the utmost verge he could still descry the great ship struggling with the
      waves; but while he looked, it was gone. The rain drove heavily into his face; and he turned
      agian and passed up into the churchyard, of which, in the sudden exchange of daylight for
      dark, he could not for a moment so much as discern the outlines. It was, in fact, lying under
      the shadow of a thundercloud that seemed to be gradually sweeping down upon the enclosure,
      which, marked by a hedge of loose stones, was the cemetery of the parish. In the blinding
      storm Glanville stumbled along, endeavouring to gain at least the antique porch, where he
      hoped there might be shelter from the rain and wind. It was utterly dark when he reached it;
      the church-doors were fastened; and, wet to the skin and almost repenting his afternoon
      ramble, he sat down on one of the stone seats which, in accordance with some forgotten point
      of ritual, were on each side of the dim recess. But he could not rest there long. He must
      stand up and gaze out once more upon the tempest, although to do so he had to shield his eyes
      from the
       mingled dust and foam that came driving in with the rain as it blew off the sea.
      A flash of lightning followed by the rattle of thunder overhead warned him that he was not in
      a very safe situation. He tried the door again, but it would not yield. Visibly the gloom of a
      thunderous atmosphere deepened over the churchyard; a mist of rain seemed to cover the ancient
      mounds of the dead; and the solemn yews stood here and there like uncanny apparitions in a
      dream, dripping with wet, and rustling mysteriously as the wild airs of heaven blew in upon
      them.
'What a desolate place!' thought Glanville. 'How it makes one shiver to think of the dead in
      these storm-swept graves by the sea! Can they rest quietly on such a day as this?' He smiled
      at his grim fancies even while he indulged them. But, looking, it seemed to him that
      something, that a figure he had not noticed, was moving in the churchyard among the low
      hillocks. At first he could not be sure, for the mist was thickening, and it might only be one
      of the leaning tombstones that to his roused imagination had assumed the outline of a cloaked
      figure. Nor had he time to look long. Flash after flash the lightning dazzled his sight, and
      the peals of thunder, coming faster than he could count, made him draw back into the porch as
      far as possible. Minutes passed before he could see distinctly. But when the extraordinary
      violence of the storm was a little abated, and a streak of open sky showed itself among the
      lower clouds, he saw, not without surprise, a tall figure in a cloak making hastily
       for the place where he stood. It was no ghost, evidently, although in such
      ghostly surroundings. Hardly, however, had Glanville made this silent observation, before the
      rain and the gloom returned, and the stranger, entering as if he perceived no one in the
      porch, flung himself down on the stone seat, and bent his head against the wall in an attitude
      of extreme fatigue. The scanty light, or rather, 'darkness visible,' to speak with Milton,
      showed only a person of commanding stature and flecks of white hair under his drooping hat.
      Glanville made no sign, but waited, somewhat curious to know what manner of personage it might
      be that visited so forlorn a spot when tempest were abroad. It was none of the guests at
      Trelingham; and no house, except the Parsonage, was nearer than three or four miles. Could he
      be some one staying at Mr. Truscombe's? or King Arthur himself, thought Glanville, come to pay
      his client a visit and thank him for the enthusiastic belief he cherished in the Table Round?
      It might well, in mien and lordly bearing, be the fabulous King. While these idle musings were
      passing through his brain, the artist was astonished to observe that his involuntary companion
      had fallen asleep where he sat. The soft and regular breathing of a sleeper was
      unmistakable.
It was a strange situation. To the watcher a sleeping person has always something peculiar,
      some sense of mystery about him, which inspires a dim and not very comfortable feeling, as of
      gazing into unknown
       depths. It is life under the semblance of death, a soul retired into far-away
      recesses whither we cannot follow, leaving the body animate, yet corpselike, a thing lying on
      the border of the great abyss and overshadowed by its horror. Glanville felt that a visitant
      from the tomb would have been almost as welcome. It was worse than being alone; he had a sense
      of the haunting presence touching him while it could not be held in turn. He would go out of
      the porch and make his way through the tempest; it was better than waiting in such undesirable
      company. But what, he said to himself, if the man were in need of succour, and too feeble to
      quit that out-of-the-way spot without assistance? He did not know whether at the Vicarage,
      itself some quarter of a mile off, there would be help, or how Mr. Truscombe's people were to
      know of a stranger lying asleep in the church vestibule. It would be more humane to wait until
      the man awoke, or gently to rouse him and ascertain his condition.

