
CHAPTER XXI THE ORDINANCES OF THE GODS
There was silence in the room. They could neither of them speak or move in the
      flood of happiness which came over them. Hippolyta was the first to release herself, and go
      back to her former attitude by the fire. She waited for him to take up the conversation.
'Then,' said Rupert with a pleasant laugh, sinking back into the chair by the easel, 'I must
      get a special license as early as I can—to-morrow morning, if possible.'
Hippolyta gave him a curious smiling look. 'Who grants you the special license?' she
      asked.
'I don't know, I am sure,' he answered. 'I am not learned in these things. I fancy it is the
      Archbishop of Canterbury.'
'Do you believe in the Archbishop of Canterbury?' she inquired, still smiling. He, too,
      smiled at the question on her lips at such a time.
'Not a great deal,' he said; 'but he is an institution,
       a piece of antiquity. And we cannot be married without him.'
'Can we not?' she said. 'What a strange thing that would be! No, Rupert, we do not want the
      Archbishop's license, or any one else's.' The words sounded strangely on her lover's ear.
'You are excited, Hippolyta,' he said, 'and it makes you talk in a fanciful way. I care
      nothing for the license. We can be married by banns, in the old fashion, if you like; but it
      will take more time, and you will have to be called by Mr. Truscombe in Trelingham
      Church.'
'Not in any church,' was her firm reply. 'Listen, Rupert, I see you do not understand me
      yet. I love you with my whole heart, but I have not ceased to be Hippolyta Valence. Do you
      know how I have been brought up? I am not a Christian; I have no religion, except to follow my
      conscience; to live the highest life and help towards realising the noblest ideas. My father
      has taught me that all religions debase them. And do you imagine it would become my father's
      daughter, at the very moment he is staking his life in the battle for the future, to stand at
      a Christian altar and submit to institutions which he and I have renounced? I will never do
      such a thing.'
'But my dear, dear Hippolyta,' he cried in amazement, 'it is only a ceremony. It can do you
      no harm.'
'Yes, it can do me this harm—that I shall be acting a falsehood. I have neither regard for
      the
       Christian ceremonies nor belief in the creed they express.'
'But surely you believe in the sacredness of wedlock.'
'I believe in the sacredness of love, but I will have no priest to utter his superstitious
      formulas over my head, or recite legends to which I must hearken while despising them, or
      pretend that you and I may not consecrate our hearts to one another without his leave. Nor
      will I submit to any civil ordinance. To bind myself before man would be more foolish even
      than to take an oath in the presence of a God I do not believe in. Why should you care,
      Rupert? You think really as I do; and yet you are the slave of old customs. Are we not alone
      in the world, simply given into each other's hands by nature and destiny? Can a priest bid you
      cease to love me, or change our feelings? Here is the marriage of true minds. Can he allege an
      impediment against it?'
Her beauty and eloquence of attitude while she spoke were extraordinary. Rupert could not
      take his eyes off her. A deep crimson dyed his cheeks; there seemed to be a singing in his
      ears, and a tremor of emotion ran through him which all his efforts were powerless to control.
      He felt himself choking. What, what demon, at once persuasive and malignant, had thrust
      Hippolyta into this frightful danger? How, good heavens, had she been so foolish, so innocent,
      as to confide herself, at such a time, under such circumstances,
       to a man who was passionately in love with her, casting away like an
      unsuspecting child the protection with which society girds about maiden honour? 'Oh,' he
      murmured, sighing heavily and turning away his eyes with a violent effort, while he set his
      teeth and grasped the arm of the chair into which he had flung himself, 'oh, to pluck this
      rose, this sweet, pale rose, breathing out love and passion! Oh, pale, sweet rose, to be
      trampled in the mire, its leaves rent, its fragrance gone, and I to be such a villain!' He
      would not look into those kindling eyes again. But the fire in his heart, how it surged, how
      it ran through his veins! It was the hot lava fire of temptation. No, no, he must not yield.
      'How did you dare to come, you mad, impulsive child?' he cried, still choked with emotion.
'Dare to come?' was her quiet answer. 'Dare, Rupert? Not come to you because I dare not?
      Why, what risk am I running? Rupert will not harm me.' Her voice was low and clear; it never
      trembled.
'Not Rupert,' he said huskily, putting down his rebellious spirit with a firm hand; 'not
      Rupert, but the wildness in him, the passion you have so cruelly, so thoughtlessly—' He would
      not continue. Better not dwell on it. One moment of weakness and they were lost. He must be
      calm, find arguments against his own tumultuous feelings, against her innocent but most fatal
      delusion. But what reasoning could avail? She did not comprehend what she had been saying,
      what her principles meant, into what a
       net she had cast herself. To her the world was utterly unknown. He could not
      reason as with one who would understand his half-words. Could he urge the example of society?
      She would laugh it to scorn. Custom, usage, respectability, how was he to make them avail
      where education had taken their value from them? There was no argument there. At last he
      exclaimed:
'But, Hippolyta, for my sake, darling; to please me, will you not do like the rest of the
      world? You shall be free as air afterwards. I have never given a thought to your religious
      views. You learnt them from your father, and it is not for me to say I know more about such
      things than he does. I was brought up in the ordinary way; I took my own line when I became a
      man, as you know. My friends would tell you, very likely, that I had not much of the Christian
      left in me, nor do I suppose I have. But some points we must observe till the world
      changes.'
'My world has changed already,' was her rejoinder; 'it has ceased to be the world of lying
      conventions and foolish worn-out antiquities. It is the world of truth and honour and love. If
      I could not promise to be faithful, if I were not sure of my own heart and of yours—'
'How can you be sure if we are not married, Hippolyta?' His voice trembled again. He could
      hardly continue. 'Might I not do as other men have done—be a scoundrel and desert the woman I
      had pretended to love? Where would be her remedy?'
       He shook with excitement and the effort to keep it down.
Hippolyta fairly laughed. 'And do you think the Archbishop's license would give her a
      remedy? What a charm for broken hearts! Why, it would be a more powerful love-philter than
      Tristram and Iseult drank together on their fatal voyage.' A slight pang of jealousy shot
      through her; she could not forget the tableau in which Rupert and Lady May pledged their love
      on the evening of the ball.
'My dear child,' said Rupert, in his exasperation, 'you argue like a woman. It is not a
      question of feelings but of rights.'
'I argue like my father, who has often told me that the great wrong on which all modern
      institutions are founded is the divorce between feeling and right.'
'But he married Lady Alice. He submitted to the social ordinances.'
'He was young then, and his principles were not fixed as they afterwards became.'
'And your mother? a man that marries twice must surely believe in matrimony.'
'I cannot tell,' said Hippolyta, musing, but not, as it would seem, convinced. 'There was in
      the union of my father and mother all the sacredness which you, and I no less than you, prize
      in wedlock. But whether they went through civil or religious forms I never learnt. I do not
      think they did.'
Rupert, in spite of his large-mindedness, felt the shock. 'And is it possible, then, that
      your mother
       was not married?' he exclaimed, with growing indignation against Colonel
      Valence.
'Quite possible,' she answered in a tranquil voice; not married as men speak who cling to
      the conventional. But she loved my father, and had no eyes for any one but him till the day
      she died.'
'I see, I feel,' he said, being utterly baffled, 'what an influence education has had on
      you. I am at a loss what to say. You are in the wrong; you do injustice to that highest nature
      you hold in veneration; and still, these principles are so novel I do not know how to cope
      with them. Oh,' he cried, in a tone of vehement desire, 'I wish Ivor Mardol were here. You
      could not resist him.'
'I do not believe he would take your side,' she answered; 'the side, I mean, which you are
      in vain attempting to defend. He is no disbeliever in the golden age.'
'Am I, then?' asked Rupert.
'It would seem so. You cannot imagine that two hearts, the most attachable that ever were,
      will be true to one another unless society—and such society! —clamps them together with iron
      bands. Ivor Mardol would rebuke your want of faith, not my trust in you. Come, Rupert, dear,'
      she went on, facing him now with her sweet and frank expression, 'let the soul of the artist
      within you burst these conventions, and float with me into a happier air. The old world is
      dying; it is nearly dead. Cannot you hear the rattle in its throat; these inarticulate
      gaspings of rites
       and ceremonies, the meaning of which was emptied away before you and I saw the
      light? We are young; we have learnt how much of what people say they believe, and only say it,
      is false to the heart's core. What concern have we with effete aristocracies, obsolete
      religions, childish betrothals with ring and book in the sight of the profane multitude? The
      infinite expanse of the future lies before us, the possibilities of to-morrow. It has taken
      many a brave life to win this fair inheritance—the poets, the dreamers, the wise men and women
      who have not dreamt merely, but have begun to realise what they dreamt. On which side will you
      take your stand,— with the old, tyrannical, foolish, helplessly cruel past, or with men like
      Ivor Mardol and Colonel Valence, with women like—yes, I dare to say it—like Hippolyta? You do
      not know the consequences of one false step in a girl brought up as I have been to act and
      speak the perfect truth. Were I to do as you bid me, to go with you before priest or
      registrar, I should degrade myself beyond redemption. This, Rupert, is the woman's protest
      against the old bad order, her martyrdom if you will. It is for man to renounce honours,
      wealth, glory, the power which involves dominion over the weak, and is founded on their
      weakness. What can a maiden renounce? I will tell you. Do not shrink if I say it, conscious of
      the unsullied life I have led and the innocent love that is beating in my heart. Rupert, she
      can renounce respectability.'

He had listened like one amazed. She spoke with burning eloquence, and her eyes were bright
      and clear as she stood before him, her countenance glowing with enthusiasm, while with the
      fervent words her bosom heaved and fell. Rupert, in a taking of love and anger, was almost
      beside himself.
'Good heavens, Hippolyta,' he burst out, 'do you want to drive me distracted? Was ever such
      a situation? You do not in the least understand your danger or mine. Child, child,' he said,
      his face darkening, 'why have you dared to put yourself thus in the power of another, even
      though that other be Rupert? I will not harm you. God forbid. But see to it that you tempt me
      no further. Go, my dear, forget these wild and hurtling words. Let me take you to your hotel.'
      he looked round as he spoke for his hat and overcoat.
She laughed, no whit displeased. 'You must find my hotel first,' she said. 'I have no
      hotel.'
'Where is your luggage then?' he inquired.
'I brought harldly any,' she replied; 'what there is I left at the railway station. I came
      here direct.'
'Well, well,' he said uneasily, 'there is no harm done; we can call for it, and then drive
      you to some hotel.'
She did not stir from her place. With a long, earnest look she examined the expression of
      Rupert's countenance, where he stood by the door. He was impatient; he could think only that
      she ought to have an address in London and not be wandering
       about like this. He would devise some means of persuading her to be reasonable
      to-morrow, when she had got over the excitemtnt of the discussion. While he was in this mental
      confusion, she walked slowly across the hearth and came to him. He turned round. They were
      again face to face.
'Rupert,' she said, 'I am here. I am your wife. We have acknowledged our mutual love, which
      has no rival nor can have a successor. Take me as I am. I love you. I do not fear you at all.'
      She looked marvellously beautiful as she stood before him waiting.
'I will not,' he cried, 'so help me God. I am willing, nay, eager as love can make me, to
      marry you. But, Hippolyta, have pity on yourself, have pity on me,' he said in an imploring
      voice; 'see, I go down on my knees to you,' and he fell sobbing at her feet. She stooped and
      touched his cheek with her ungloved hand.
'No, Rupert,' she answered, weeping; 'I have my code of honour as you have yours. We will be
      married my way or no way. You must choose.'
'Then,' he said, rising with a groan that tore his heart, 'it shall be no way. I cannot, I
      will not dishonour you.' He did not dare to lift his eyes to her face.
'It is all over then,' she said in a faint whisper. 'Good-bye, Rupert. I have staked and
      lost. No matter, no matter. Let me go.'
'Go where?' he said, detaining her. 'You shall
       not walk alone at this time of night through the London streets. I will
      accompany you as I proposed.'
Her look had a strange meaning in it. 'Let me go,' she murmured; 'I am not afraid of the
      streets. I know my way.'
'But you said you had no hotel.' He was resolved to go with her.
'I shall not need an hotel,' was the answer she made. She drew her cloak about her shoulders
      and attempted to pass him. Rupert had drawn the curtain aside which hung over the door, but he
      held the handle fast.
'What are you going to do?' he said.
'Do you imagine,' she replied, 'that I have spent all my resources in asking you to accept
      my love? When I left Falside I had reckoned with the contingencies of our situation. I knew
      what I was risking. My reputation —as you call it,—has not a visit like this, under these
      circumstances, blown it to the four winds?'
'Who saw you come in?' he said eagerly. He felt the force of her words.
'Your servant and her children,' she said. 'I gave no name, but my veil was up. They will be
      able to describe me.'
'I can trust old Martha,' he answered, 'if there was nobody else.'
'But you cannot trust me,' replied Hippolyta. 'I have put myself into your hands, and my
      character is dead. I have killed the Miss Valence who was, or might have been, a respectable
      member of society.
       Can I be the same to you as if this had not taken place?'
He thought she was relenting. 'You can, you can,' he exclaimed with a feeling of relief. 'It
      matters nothing what you have said or done to-night. Let us forget it, darling; forget it, my
      own worshipped Hippolyta.'
'You mistake me still,' she said. 'I am not come to act a play. What I have done is a part
      of myself. If you take me with it you renounce the social ordinances which, instead of
      uniting, have almost separated us. But if you do not—' There was a long pause, or else the
      minutes stretched out in this spiritual agony.
'And if I do not?' Rupert said slowly, as if coming to himself out of a sleep.
'In that case, to-night will be the last of Hippolyta Valence,' she answered.
'Do you mean that you will—?' He could not finish the sentence.
'I mean,' she said under her breath, 'that I know my way to the river. I will go whither so
      many of my poor sisters have gone before me; and neither you nor any man shall hinder it.' And
      again she endeavoured to pass him.
'Stand back,' he cried out; 'you shall not go. You have lost your senses.' And even as he
      spoke the thought of uttering such harsh language to the woman he loved smote upon him. 'Dear,
      sweet Hippolyta,' he said, taking her hand, 'forgive me.
       It is I that am mad. But do not be angry. Give up these wild thoughts. Be
      persuaded. I will do anything.'
'Anything but what I ask,' she said. 'Oh, I do not mind your hard words. But enough. We have
      seen the last of each other. We must go our several ways.' She was calm and resolute. Her eyes
      had gathered a brilliant light in them during the moments of their altercation; and Rupert, as
      he looked at her, thought she was the woman to do as she had said. If he let her go the river
      would be her restingplace ere morning.
Then began a fresh scene of earnest, impassioned pleading on his part and resistance on
      hers. He begged, he entreated, he grew angry and gentle by turns, he employed the most
      caressing language and all the resources of the lover's art, not as many a lover has done, to
      overcome the scruples of modesty, but to save this high and noble spirit, noble in its very
      aberrations, from shipwreck. He might as well have poured out his eloquence to the stones of
      the street. Hippolyta heard it all unmoved. She said once, 'I do not scorn you for trying to
      change me, but I should scorn myself if I yielded. Tell me that you cannot love me unless I
      submit to this mockery and I shall understand. But, even then, I will not give in to you. Can
      you tell me so?'
'No, Hippolyta,' he answered, 'it would not be true. This is no question of love. Whatever
      you become I shall feel the same towards you that I did
       when you dawned upon me like a heavenly apparition in the Hermitage.'
'If our love remains,' she said, 'what can the rest signify?' and the contest broke out
      again. But it was not equal. Hippolyta, as she truly said, had thought over the contingencies
      of that strange situation, and was prepared for the worst. Her life, spent with those who were
      ever exposing themselves in the field or ready to mount the scaffold, had familiarised her
      with the idea not only of self-sacrifice, but of failure which has death for its price. The
      risk, she said, must have been undertaken some day, why not now? To persuade Rupert in cold
      blood, or by the use of arguments, was, she knew, impossible. One weapon which not even he
      could pluck from her hand, one last resource there was which left the man and woman unequally
      matched—and the man inferior. She told him plainly. 'Do not be a tyrant,' she said, 'and
      compel me to die. But this be sure of, only by yielding to my wish can you persuade me to
      live. Make the trial. Open the door and let me go, or quit me and do not return. In
      twenty-four hours you will hear news of me.'
What could avail against such resolution? Rupert said to her at last, 'Will you stay here
      and do yourself no harm to-night, if I leave you? Give me time to reflect. You may have
      changed your mind in the morning.'
'I shall not change my mind,' she said. 'But I will stay here on these conditions. Promise
      me to
       come back as early as you can to-morrow and to look upon me henceforth as your
      wife. Promise, Rupert, and I will wait quietly. But if you do not return, or still insist on
      what I cannot yield,—you know the rest. My dear,' she said softly, 'you have to deal with a
      loving woman. Trust me and let us be happy together. Do you promise?'
'I promise,' he answered in a low voice.
It was like consenting to death. The room swam before him. But when Hippolyta heard the
      words her countenance lightened wonderfully. She became a naive child instead of the resolute
      woman that had been pleading in that desperate and unparalleled cause. 'Now go,' she said,
      offering him her cheek to kiss. He touched it with his lips, almost shudderingly. She held the
      door open. He bethought himself for a moment before going, and said, 'You will find the means
      of making a fire in the morning, and getting a morsel to eat. Lock the door. Don't answer any
      one till I come. I will look in at the lodge as I go past and tell Martha she need not trouble
      about the place; that I have left it safe, and do not want it disturbed at present. You must
      not be surprised, Hippolyta, if I am delayed till towards noon. There will be many things to
      see to. And— and you will not do anything I am away?'
'Keep your word,' she answered, 'and I will keep mine.'
He fled down the steps and along the gardenpath. He heard the key turn in the lock. He did
       not venture even to glance back, but ran straight on, gave a quick, brief
      message to the woman who came out as he passed, and with head down and rapid step took the
      road towards London. More agitated he could not have been had he left a murdered body in his
      studio. It was worse, he said to himself; he had murdered a soul. 'And yet not I, not I,' he
      murmured repeatedly, 'it is her father that has ruined her with his principles.'
He walked on and on. The winds were still up, driving the clouds through a beautiful stormy
      sky in which the moon shone bright at intervals. It had ceased raining and the streets were
      dry underfoot for the most part, though here and there a pool of water gleamed on the roadway,
      and all the scene reminded one of a chill March night rather than the end of May. There was a
      high-strung feeling in the atmosphere which harmonised with Rupert's excited mood, and gave
      him a vivid sense as though in comparison he had never lived till now. What had he promised?
      Was there any retreat from it compatible with honour, nay, with the existence of Hippolyta?
      And this, then, was the realising of all his hopes! Oh, bitter mockery! He went over the
      debate again and again. Why had he not urged this, why forgotten that? He had been too tame,
      too yielding; he might have pleaded more earnestly for himself. Hippolyta was generous, and if
      he had insisted on the injury to his own sense of rectitude, to his reputation, which had
      never endured a stain, to his happiness,
       which must be sacrificed if they were to live in concealment or come forth with
      shameless foreheads before the world,—but what did it avail? The hour was past and his word
      given. To-morrow? It wanted how few moments of the day when he and Hippolyta should become
      outcasts from the world in which he had been brought up? And he was helpless, bound hand and
      foot by the devilish teaching of Colonel Valence. Who would have believed yesterday that the
      dreams of a revolutionist were henceforth to shape his life for Rupert Glanville? He had been
      content to dwell in the regions of the ideal; to put aside these questions, tossed to and fro
      by politicians and reformers, as vulgar, unworthy of the artist's consideration, fit only for
      debating clubs. And they had broken into his retreat and were clustering about his
      hearthstone. On him—him—Rupert Glanville, the crisis of the modern world had fallen.
'Why should it not?' he said with a bitter laugh as he hurried along. 'Am I so unlike the
      rest of men? Valence was right. The world is a universal shipwreck, and my turn has come to be
      thrown out on the waters. Every one must cling to his own spar. But how strangely, good God,
      how strangely it has come about! Hippolyta, so young, so innocent, incapable of hurting the
      tenderest thing,—all feeling, purity, and affection,—must Hippolyta be lost, and I be the
      instrument of her undoing? It is too much.'
He stopped and gazed up and down the silent
       road, bewildered to such a degree that he knew not whether to turn back and try
      to persuade Hippolyta, or to leave it all to chance and depart by the next mail for the
      Continent. He could be ready in a few hours. He was now nearing home, and terribly fatigued
      with the excitement and exhaustion of the day, for he had eaten nothing since noon. To pack a
      portmanteau, write a farewell note, telling Hippolyta that a bad promise ought to be broken
      and he could not bring himself to do her wrong, then to drive to Charing Cross and catch the
      Dover train,—all this was still possible. He had almost resolved on it, but for the memory of
      her resolute pale face and her steady words, which assured him that she had not been acting a
      part. What should he feel if she carried her threat into execution, and he learned in Florence
      or Dresden that her body had been found defiled in the mud of the Thames, her sweet eyes
      closed for ever? No, he dared not risk it. Even death would not save her now; after spending a
      night in that fatal studio she was to the world at large dishonoured. She had spoken the
      truth; in paying such a visit her character was blown to the four winds. The falling snow was
      not more stainless, and yet she must bear about with her the penalty of guilt.
His thoughts, as he wandered aimlessly under the fitful moon and the wild clouds, took a
      fresh turn. He would not go home yet. He stood looking through the railings of the Park, and
      studied with an absorbed
       gaze the misty lawns on which lay a film of uncertain moonlight, while the dark
      stems of the trees made a solemn background. 'After all,' so his meditation ran, 'who knows?
      Hippolyta may be right. What is the world's marriage but a ceremony? How many of us believe in
      it or respect it? Should I have let it stand in the way if I had fallen in love with a married
      woman and discovered that she was miserable? Fortunate for me, I daresay, that I never did.
      Things are all breaking up; it seems as if the lease of the old world had run out and the
      building had to come down. Certainly it is years since I entered a church with any belief in
      what goes on there. Have I any reason to become its champion? None, none whatever, except a
      feeble dislike to be pointed at as eccentric or a libertine. God knows I am no saint, but
      neither am I a libetine. How could I consent to the ruin of an innocent child? But she says it
      is not ruin. It will be a marriage of the heart, and why should I mind? If we were on a desert
      island, where there was neither clergyman nor registrar, should we hesitate to marry or think
      ourselves not married till one came? What is the difference then? For to me the social order
      is of no more consequence than a panorama which I see pass by, one view drawing after it
      another, and none of them lasting. I cannot answer Hippolyta's objections. Oh, why did Ivor go
      away? He would tell me what to do; he would find a solution. Is it only inbred custom that
      revolts in me, or something higher and better; is it the heart which will not
       have its affection degraded, or a want of nobility in the intellect, fettered by
      chains of use? I cannot tell. Who is there that can tell me?' He lost himself in the endless
      discussion. The sound of a distant cab hurrying along broke from time to time upon his ear;
      but it died away into silence while he walked hither and thither, scanning the shapes and
      motions of the silvery clouds and the deep rifts of blue where the stars shone faintly. Was
      Hippolyta asleep at this hour, or pacing the studio in troubled thought as he was pacing up
      and down Park Lane? Again he felt tempted to go back.
He walked a few steps in the direction he had come; then, with a strong effort, frightened
      and feeling a chill at his heart, like one who has heard the voice of an evil being near him,
      he turned again and went hastily along the deserted streets, not towards his studio, but
      towards the river. He could not have explained what lugubrious fancy it was that led him on,
      neither pausing nor looking back, nor assigning to himself a reason for the way he was
      travelling, but still moving, as by instinct, always towards the river. In the weird and
      silent light, shed by a moon which gradually drank up the clouds and seemed to grow larger and
      larger, he caught a glimpse of his shadow, now in advance, now moving sideways with him, now
      emerging from the deep gloom of enormous buildings as a drowning man rises for a moment from
      the waves which are to close over him again. He passed a solitary figure at the turn of a
      street, and could hardly refrain from asking it
       what business took it abroad at such an hour. He heard the steady march of a
      policeman pacing up and down, and the echo from the opposite side of the way, with something
      of the guilty apprehension that dogs an ill deed; he would have felt easier had no one in the
      huge city been awake but himself. And still he made for the river. A fresh breeeze blew upon
      his forehead when he emerged from a narrow lane; he saw the vast shadow of the Abbey, and the
      moon resting over it; other shadows came, as it were to meet him and guide him on. In the
      quiet which had succeeded to the rush and tumult of a London day there was something
      inexpressibly awful and mysterious; something as terrible as death, for it came upon him like
      the cessation of innumerable lives, of myriad activities, like the lying down to a rest which
      might never be broken, so profound was the silence over it, of millions upon millions. And
      then he was standing alone on Westminster Bridge.
For that brief space of time, the river with its multiplied solemn lights stretching far
      away, the immense radiance of the moon quenching them in one place, contrasting with them in
      another, all that flood of dreary waters and still drearier memories belonged to him alone. It
      had no name, no associations with history, no taint of the vulgar day; it was a broad river
      flowing by a great wicked city down to the unknown sea. And in its deeps were the secrets of
      wasted lives, a vision of horror not to be explored by the boldest. Yet he would force himself
      to think
       of those whom Hippolyta, the pure unsullied Hippolyta, had called her sisters,
      and with whom she had been willing to make her bed that night. Where he was standing, in
      another hour, let him but utter the word, she would be gazing her last on earth and sky. He
      saw her mounting the parapet, heard her cry of despair as the arches of the bridge echoed and
      re-echoed it in the stillness, watched her as she sprang, as she whirled through the air, as
      her body struck upon the rushing waters, and her golden hair floated in the light one instant,
      then was swallowed down into the deeps of death. Another of the pitiful sisterhood to whom
      suicide opens its ghastly arms, another folded in the embrace of the spectre that knows not
      how to help sorrow but by slaying! And was that to be Hippolyta's doom? 'Not now,' he said
      aloud, 'not to-night, unless I lose pity for the sake of I know not what poor forms and
      conventional virtues. It shall not be to-night.' He looked steadfastly down at the river, and
      from a great distance the whisper was conveyed to his heart, 'Not to-night, do you say? But
      another night may come, more desolate than this; a night when Hippolyta, degraded, ruined,
      forsaken, the cruel sport of passion and poverty, shall find her way hither, and looking round
      for one that loved her in the old time and is not near nor will come again, crying out to the
      silence to have pity on her, shall find no refuge but in these deeps of death. Are you willing
      that such shall be the end of your romance, of your loyalty?'
       The great light reflected beneath seemed to be gazing at him.
Even as the fancy came he beheld—whether with the eyes of flesh or only with those of the
      spirit, who shall say?—the depths of the river lit up, its secret places opening; he beheld
      its slimy banks and muddy, festering floor, which some indescribable vegetation clothed and
      made more horrible, and the dark yellow waters rushing along, ghastly in a pale flame, which
      gave them a half transparency, and which illuminated that pathway of the drowned as if it were
      a mausoleum wherein sacrifices to the dead, or on behalf of them, were to be offered that
      night. He saw the multitude crowding upon one another, and again they seemed to be each in its
      own solitude; so that he was oppressed at one and the same time with contradictory feelings of
      a throng from which there was no escape save into the unlighted abysses beyond, and a
      loneliness where no voice came. His ear seemed to detect the sound of footsteps moving swiftly
      or slowly, but oftenest with the dragging gait of despair, moving from the distant city
      streets, from east and west, from north and south, from the ends of the earth, converging all
      towards the spot where he was standing,—a ceaseless, dreadful march of those that did not know
      one another, nor in this life ever should, but were contributing to swell one host, and
      precipitating themselves into a common grave. The river itself was peopled with the dead; but
      still the dead came hurrying, crowding, rushing with maddened steps, or
       creeping as in a dream, along all the ways which led up to the bridge and into
      the flaming waters. There was no other sound than the march of innumerable feet, no outcry to
      pierce the ear of darkness and wake those that slept in their warm beds, oblivious of their
      brothers and sisters who, fainting under the weary load of life, came to cast it from them
      into depths where it should be found no more. He heard the steps behind him, around him; the
      pavements were alive with them, but the host marching forward was already enrolled in the
      ranks of death. And as they pressed down into the river, breathless, hopeless, with wild eyes
      and haggard looks, he saw the numbers of them that had entered into this sabbath of suicides
      rise in their dripping garments to meet their associates in crime and desolation. The
      multitude grew and grew; but there was ever fresh room as it moved downward to the remoter
      places, whence, as it seemed to him, the ascending tide was bringing a noise of the sea and of
      the night-winds struggling upon it. Here was the waste of the world, the human souls and
      bodies for which in life no room could be discovered nor a ransom given: here was a redemption
      wrought for others, for the happy among men, by suffering. But how unlike that redemption
      spoken of in the churches! For upon this no resurrection followed; it was an offering of
      victims whereof account was not made and whose pains had but one alleviation—that they were
      ended by death. Or was it possible that the great sea towards which the throng seemed to be
      moving
       might prove more dreadful than the river? Had those old tales of the fiery deep,
      and the streams of lament and forgetfulness, any truth in them which made of suicide not only
      the dreariest but the deadliest of sins? What did that stony look in the eyes, what did that
      scared hue upon the cheeks portend? A wasted life might then be nothing in comparison with a
      self-inflicted death. The dark realms; the infinite shadow; the jaws which opened from
      beneath, in the deeps immeasurable; the grave that was but an entrance to a lower grave, which
      would swallow the living soul as these waters had sucked down the body, —yes, it was more
      natural to believe in them here, when sin and death met face to face. And was Hippolyta to
      join this multitude, to dedicate her purity and her young affection to the powers of darkness,
      turning from the glory of the sun to go down such ways into the everlasting sea, whence no
      bark would bring her again or any mortal?
He could bear it no longer. With these pursuing thoughts behind him, he quitted his station
      on the bridge, and hastily descended into the streets once more. He fled from himself, from
      Hippolyta, from the night, from the morning, which had almost begun to dawn while he looked
      into that awful gallery of the dead. He was utterly bewildered and undone. Conscience smote
      him on one side and on the other; whatever he should resolve would be wrong, and fatality was
      dogging his steps never to leave him. But for a little while, cost what it might, he must
       become blind and heedless. He would go home, to rest if it were possible, and
      let to-morrow bring what it pleased.
In such confusion did he arrive, weary and chilled to the marrow, at his own house. He let
      himself in. The moon was still shining when he entered. Creeping noiselessly upstairs, he
      undressed in the light which came in at his window, and with a heavy sigh lay down to sleep.
      When he woke again it was broad day. A gleam of the early sunshine rested on his face; and he
      rose with an instant remembrance of the scenes through which he had passed.
'Rupert,' he said to himself between scorn and pity, 'is this to be the last day of your
      blameless life? Well, well; and what shall be the reward?'
He dressed quickly, swallowed a mouthful of breakfast, and went out. After walking through
      several streets, he looked round at a point where no one seemed to be in sight but the driver
      of a hansom cab, who was just then passing under the archway of a mews with his vehicle.
      Rupert hailed him, and bade him drive at his fastest pace to an address in the suburbs. It was
      a long way off. 'There is not a moment to spare,' said the artist as he sprang in.

