<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER XXVIII WRECKED!</head>
<p>Such was the first of her weary and fruitless journeys, undertaken by Hippolyta
      during that day and the next two or three, in search of her lost and fallen sister. Not
      finding Maurice Regan at his legal address—but, of course, they had not expected to find him
      there—Ivor sat down and wrote him a brief account of Annie's disappearance, requesting him to
      let her parents know if he was acquainted with her whereabouts, as the police were already
      engaged in searching for her; and if he were not, to take such steps as lay in his power
      towards her recovery from the danger into which she had plunged. The next point was to visit
      Charlotte Fraser, who either could not or would not give them any information, except the
      names of certain persons, lower than herself in the social scale, with whom Annie had been
      wont to consort. The places where these women abode did not seem fit for Mrs. Malcolm to
      approach. Ivor
      <pb n="33"/> promised that he would make all needful inquiry, and let her know the result. She
      begged him to address her at the gardener's cottage; for, even in this crisis and bewilderment
      of her faculties, she was still uncertain whether Rupert would wish his friend to know that
      she lived at Forrest House. So far as Ivor was concerned she need have had no anxiety. He was
      ignorant of Rupert's connection with that red-brick mansion, as of the extent and situation of
      his property altogether, except that of the house in town at which he had once stayed.</p>
<p>They were three long and miserable days, while a bitter east wind was blowing under the
      darkened sky, and in Hippolyta's heart there was a sense of growing distress and heaviness
      which she could not account for, even when she thought of the trouble in her friends' home.
      Certainly it was sad to look on Mrs. Dauris, now sinking into a state of perilous exhaustion,
      her appetite gone, and a severe headache and racking pains in the chest making her almost
      insensible to the cause which had brought her low. Annie's father was still more to be pitied.
      At times even his religious faith threatened to give way; he sat in mournful silence, or broke
      out into sharp words of reproach against his misguided child; and only Charlie's affection and
      thoughtful care prevented him from yielding to the demon which always lurks at such a season
      of misery near the threshold of the poor. It was the boy of eleven whose gentle earnestness
      kept the grown man from forgetting his sorrow in drink. But he had
      <pb n="34"/> set his children a good example of which he was now, in Charlie's piety and
      devotedness, reaping the fruit. Mr. Dauris was a good man and a true Christian; he knew that
      he must not yield; but desperation was ever whispering that he might as well yield now as
      afterwards.</p>
<p>'You see,' he said, 'Mrs. Malcolm, we have done our best, but Annie has proved too much for
      us. Her mother will die; and what does it matter how I live? But yes,' interrupting himself,
      'it does matter, and you do well to rebuke me with your looks. I beg your pardon. I ought to
      have more trust in the goodness of God.'</p>
<p>Hippolyta said all she could think of to comfort him. The struggle of such a man under
      temptation was dreadful to see. Could a foolish love in one young girl's bosom work so great
      harm? What a contrast between the happy, peaceful husband and wife, patient in spite of their
      trials, as they had appeared on her first knowing them, and the shattered home where every
      divine light seemed in danger of being quenched! The shock to this good man's virtue affected
      Hippolyta even more than the ruin of his happiness. 'It is little to be unhappy,' she thought,
      as she went away that evening; 'one may be unhappy, yet endure it. The horrible change is when
      one falls from the ideal and is willing to believe in universal disorder, as though it were no
      use to hold by what is good.' She dwelt repeatedly on these things in her own mind while going
      to and fro next day in the
      <pb n="35"/> haunts of Annie Dauris. She called on Ivor Mardol, hoping there might be some
      fresh intelligence. But there was none; and at the close of a weary afternoon, dismissing the
      cab which brought her to the bottom of Bransmere Road, she began to walk towards home.</p>
<p>'It seems very late,' she said to herself, pulling out her watch. It was just half-past
      seven. While she stopped to look at the time, for it was anything but a bright evening, she
      noticed that a number of persons were going by her up the Hill, and that no one was coming
      down. She looked round and found herself in the midst of a not inconsiderable crowd, all going
      apparently the same way. Some were well-dressed, but the greater number, both men and women,
      belonged to the labouring class, and many of them were thinly defended against the cold.
      Hippolyta walked on with them, wondering, in an absent, tired fashion what could be taking all
      these people past Forrest House. But her wonder ceased when she came to her own gate and saw
      that they were entering the church beyond. As she paused with her hand on the lock she heard
      the organ rolling out its solemn music, and perceived a dim light shining through the stained
      glass windows, the confused emblems of which she had tried to make out the first evening when
      Rupert quitted her. She was exhausted with the long day's work. The sense of loneliness and
      uncertainty which for some weeks past had been gaining on her was now at its height; and she
      felt in that dangerous mood when the slightest token, one
      <pb n="36"/> way or another, determines a nature like Hippolyta's to make an experiment with
      the unknown, in the hope of finding what has been sought to so little purpose elsewhere. After
      reflecting for a moment she turned from her own gate, drew her furs about her, let down her
      veil, and followed into the church with the multitude.</p>
<p>It was already thronged, and Hippolyta had some difficulty in making her way through the
      narrow porch and past the still narrower doors which opened inside it, under a gallery at the
      west end. A few jets of gas, at long intervals, cast their uncertain flickering light on the
      crowded benches at which the people were already kneeling, strings of beads in the hands of
      most. They were engaged, as it would seem, in public prayer, for a low monotonous hum, broken
      only by the click of the beads, ran from time to time through the building. Hippolyta could
      perceive, when she was able to find a place, that there were kneeling forms likewise in the
      chancel, which by that dim light seemed to be a great distance from the western porch. And
      they, too, from time to time, murmured something of which she could only gather the sound
      without being able to understand in what language it was spoken. A devout woman, seeing her
      standing up, made way for her at the end of a bench near the wall; and Hippolyta, unable now
      to move in advance or to retreat by the way she had come, judged it prudent to kneel like the
      others lest she should draw their attention. The monotonous
      <pb n="37"/> prayer ceased; the people stood up and sang a hymn; the jets of gas were turned
      to their full height on both sides of the central aisle; and Hippolyta, raising her eyes, saw
      that an ecclesiastic, in a white surplice, and with an embroidered scarf over his shoulders,
      was standing in the pulpit about half-way between the altar and the west end of the church,
      waiting in silence till the people had taken their seats again and were quiet.</p>
<p>Now that the church was lighted up Hippolyta was able to judge of its extent, which, though
      not vast, like those of the immense cathedrals she had visited on the Continent, was
      considerable and imposing. It was built in a pure style of pointed architecture; and the
      clustered columns, with their slender shafts and deeply-wrought capitals, gave it an air of
      loveliness which enhanced the beauty of its proportions. On either side were chapels with
      lamps burning in front of their altars, while a profusion of statuary under niches seemed to
      betoken that the heavenly citizens were come down to dwell with their brethren on earth and
      offer them protection in exchange for homage. There were pictures here and there on the walls,
      but it was impossible for Hippolyta to make out the subjects. At the extreme end of the church
      a solitary lamp glowed crimson within the chancel. The stained imagery of the windows,
      luminous outside, was black and indistinguishable viewed from within. Every nook and corner of
      the church now seemed filled with people like those Hippolyta had met
      <pb n="38"/> coming up the Hill. It took them some little while to be seated and to have
      finished coughing. Meanwhile the preacher stood still with an open book on the desk before
      him, and a crucifix in his left hand.</p>
<p>He was by no means a striking figure, although the calm decision of the attitude in which he
      stood betokened something not quite commonplace. He seemed of about the average height, or a
      little more, with dark, close-clipped hair and beardless face, very dark steady eyes, and the
      worn expression of countenance which is so frequent in Roman Catholic saints of an ascetic
      type,—an expression to be rendered by some such phrase as 'fasting from earthly joys.' His
      hands were thin and nervous, brown rather than white, and now kept motionless, one resting on
      the edge of the pulpit, the other grasping the ebony cross on which glimmered the dead-pale
      figure of ivory. Amid a hush of perfect silence he stooped, took up the book, and gave out
      these words in a clear low voice: 'In the sixth chapter, twenty-third verse, of his Epistle to
      the Romans, St. Paul has written, "The wages of sin"—he paused, seemed to lift the crucifix
      ever so little, and to let it fall as he uttered the conclusion of his text—"is death." '</p>
<p>There is nothing, there is everything, in the inflection of a human voice. Hippolyta's
      mental wanderings were arrested. This unknown man had as yet pronounced not a word of his own,
      and he was already speaking to her; his accents came close round her heart. Was there likely
      to be any wisdom
      <pb n="39"/> with which he was conversant and which she had yet to learn? Impossible.
      Nevertheless she seemed to say to him under her breath, 'Speak on, what is your message?'</p>
<p>He was already speaking in the same searching, musical tones—slightly foreign she thought
      them— that gathered volume as he went on, and rose gradually to a steady height at which they
      seemed to float over the assembly. Not a word was wasted; clear and distinct each of them fell
      upon the ear and pierced into the spirit, carrying with it a sense of truth rather than of
      passion, of what must be said because so things were, rather than of rhetoric framed to
      delight or to hold the fancy captive. Hippolyta could interpret their music, she could follow
      their eloquence. The doctrine, abounding in brief allusions as to things well known, she did
      not grasp. But again and again, when the preacher turned a swift glance to the crucifix and
      once more bent his eyes on the audience, it seemed to her that he as well as they, and they no
      less than he, were conscious of an awful presence wherein whatever he said took on it the
      impress of eternal, absolute truth.</p>
<p>He spoke of their gathering that night as to an enrolment on the eve of battle. They were to
      range themselves under a standard, to take the oath of allegiance to a captain, and to look
      the campaign in the face on which they were entering. How should they choose if they knew not
      the difference between the contending causes? Let them not enrol themselves
      <pb n="40"/> except in the light of knowledge and as prepared for the extremities of war. They
      must be ready to submit to the event, for it was not here as in the battling of earthly
      powers, where quarter was given, prisoners taken alive, and a peace made at the end. Each
      party would inflict on the other all it could of defeat and disaster. This at any rate was
      sure. Would they ask proof at his hands? He held forth the crucifix. Such, he repeated in
      grave emphatic terms, was the culminating victory of the powers of evil, which they wrought
      upon the leader of the hostile array. They stripped and scourged Him; they made Him an open
      shame; they reft Him of friends, followers, admirers, so that He fell down wounded and alone
      under the shadow of death; and as He lay a helpless captive they did with Him what they would,
      flouting and mocking His pretended majesty with the purple rags of kingship and a crown of
      wild brier. He made no complaint; He was but enduring what a man must expect from his enemies.
      It was the fortune of war. Neither did He beg their mercy when they smote Him through with
      nails and fastened His dying body to the Cross; what else should they, being the powers of
      darkness, do with one that could never own their dominion or be their friend? He stretched out
      His hands to the hammer which drove in the spikes; He bowed His head, the thorny wreath
      wounding it, upon the pillow they had made for Him. 'Was that all?' asked the preacher, as he
      looked round upon the silent audience. 'Was
      <pb n="41"/> the cup drained to the dregs? Not so; there remained a bitter draught, compared
      with which all bodily pain was little. From His Cross Jesus, opening His eyes on the world,
      meditating on the years He had spent, saw words and works alike frustrate, the good defeated,
      evil triumphant; power, and wealth, and dominion, and knowledge, and religion itself, in the
      service of a lie. He was hanging on the Cross, not worshipped on the throne of the world. Why?
      Because the world was Satan's and all it contained. Therefore Christ was made an outcast, and
      His efforts came to naught. Suffering and death were the penalty of rebelling against the
      dominion of crowned and sceptred evil. In this sense, too, the wages of sin is death. To
      resist sin is to die.'</p>
<p>Hippolyta listened as to the opening bars of a symphony which unlocks the feeling and brings
      into vivid presentment vague thoughts one has had for years—thoughts that have wandered
      formless through the heavens like an unseen vapour which is not yet capable of taking the
      appearance of a rain-cloud. What were the powers of evil which had the sovereignty of lower
      things? Were there any such? or was it a parable for the unlearned to which she was thus
      giving ear?</p>
<p>The preacher, who seemed to be uttering thoughts given to him at that very instant, resumed.
      With the passion and death of his Master he bound up the misery, degradation, pain, anguish,
      torture, disappointment, of every human life. He might, like Hippolyta,
      <pb n="42"/> have been dwelling in the deeps with those to whom light and hope were denied.
      His voice trembled and grew husky, his eyes filled with tears. 'Sorrow is universal,' he
      cried; 'it is like the air of heaven, we cannot live out of it. And what shall we say? Has it
      no meaning, no purpose?' A mild light kindled in his eyes. 'Brethren,' he went on, as under
      the inspiration of a loftier spirit, 'it has a meaning and a purpose. Its meaning is the moral
      of the Cross— the wages of sin; its purpose is the triumph of the Cross, it is redemption.'
      And soaring up into the unseen, which alone, as he declared, is true and everlasting, he
      exalted that life of Christ, that heavenly existence, which began with His defeat and death on
      Calvary. 'Was there,' he asked, 'any other way of winning mankind, or of overcoming the powers
      of darkness save by this supreme resignation? And who was it that failed and suffered loss in
      the battle which cost Jesus of Nazareth His life, His earthly honour, His glory, nay, the very
      peace of His human soul? Was it Jesus or Satan that came to naught on that day?' Then,
      enlarging on this strange philosophy, he showed how sin, the one absolute disorder, brings
      with it all others, and is from the first an admission of defeat; how it untunes the universe.
      While goodness, which has the promise of life in itself, cannot die. The triumph of time is
      for the powers that have no dominion beyond it, but can only look for a certain dreadful
      coming of judgment when time is past; the good alone does not, cannot perish, but
      <pb n="43"/> is everlasting. And again he asked in piercing tones, with his eyes on the emblem
      which he seemed to study as a book, 'Is Jesus dead? or does He not give the mightiest token of
      life by making all those live that believe in Him? They conquer themselves by His indwelling
      spirit; and when a man has become his own captive, he has subdued the world. Christ reigns in
      hearts innumerable of men and women; on them, as on Him, sin has done its worst; it has
      inflicted death, not once, but every time the cup of pitiless suffering has been held to their
      lips. But can it do more? The pain which destroys only this lower happiness has become, for
      such, redemption without end.'</p>
<p>Then he depicted, with forcible and gloomy eloquence, the lot of those who, shrinking from
      earthly pain, have chosen sin and its eternal remorse. At the foot of Calvary he seemed to
      open the bottomless pit wherein all they dwelt to whom the harmony of God's law was turned to
      discord. These were the martyrs of evil who made their own hell; no God made it, but they
      themselves, lighting up in their own breasts the fire they could never put out. The wages of
      sin? What were the wages of hatred, envy, drunkenness, unhallowed love, indulgence of
      self-will? And was there any principle anywhere that could so change the nature of things as
      to hinder these from having their consequences? To resist sin was to suffer a momentary death,
      to enter heaven, like St. Laurence, through a curtain of fire; to yield to it
      <pb n="44"/> was to take into one's bosom the seed of everlasting death, and to dwell in the
      world of horror we had created for our Paradise. Would they choose Christ with His Cross or
      Satan with his fiery crown? There was no halting or being neutral on this battlefield; to be
      neutral was to be defeated ere a blow had been struck.</p>
<p>For a long while, Hippolyta thought, the voice continued in this strain; but though its
      sound fell upon her ears she was not hearkening. She had heard enough. Sitting there alone,
      unfriended, and worn out with her three days' searching, she felt like one that, watching from
      the deck of a deserted vessel, beholds the dawn breaking over a wintry and wreck-strewn sea.
      The illusions of life were at an end. She was wounded to the heart's core. Had she, then,
      chosen hitherto the service of darkness, imagining that it would usher in the kingdom of
      light? She remembered the text of her own gospel, taken from Goethe, <hi>Im Ganzen, Guten,
       Schönen fest zu leben</hi> . If the preacher were not wholly wrong, what a mockery it was!
      Not order but disorder; not good but evil; not the beautiful, but this monstrous thing called
      sin—such had been the deities worshipped in her ignorance. She bowed her head in her hands and
      wept hot tears beneath her veil.</p>
<p>Suddenly, while the voice of the preacher still resounded in the pulpit, Hippolyta saw the
      vast congregation rising to their feet. Innumerable lights twinkled over the church; almost
      every one present
      <pb n="45"/> held a taper which seemed to have been lit at a preconcerted signal. The
      preacher's face was half-turned away to the high altar. Hippolyta, doing mechanically like the
      others, rose from her seat; and the devout woman next to whom she had been sitting put a
      lighted taper into her hand, which, not knowing why, she held aloft as she saw them all doing.
      The people began, with the thunder of their many voices, to repeat a solemn formula after the
      priest; and Hippolyta, her ear more accustomed to what was going forward, could now
      distinguish words renouncing evil and dedicating those who uttered them to the service and the
      Cross of their Redeemer. She could not join in the words, but her tears fell fast. The good
      woman near looked at her very kindly. And while she was endeavouring to conceal her emotion,
      she happened to look across the church, and there, not a long way from the pulpit, she saw
      William Dauris standing with a taper in his hand, not bowed down with sorrow as when she
      parted from him the evening before, but erect and firm in attitude repeating the words of
      dedication and renouncement, while the tears ran down his cheeks. A sense of thankfulness
      relieved the fulness of Hippolyta's heart; if she, too, continued weeping it was not with such
      extreme desolation. There was one, at least, who had vanquished his great enemy.</p>
<p>She could not tell what followed; her mind was all absorbed. The twinkling tapers were put
      out; lights appeared far away in the chancel blazing over
      <pb n="46"/> the high altar and around it; figures in strange raiment came and went; the smoke
      of incense ascended clouding the lights; and music seemed to be filling the high roof above
      and rolling its waves on every side. It did not soothe, it excited her. She became conscious
      that she was meditating a daring resolution. At that moment she thought of no one but herself
      and the Form that seemed to be gazing at her still from the crucifix. There was an interval of
      intense stillness; the organ had stopped, all heads were bent, and she saw something—she could
      not tell what—going forward at the altar. Thrice she heard the tinkle of an unseen bell; and
      the music broke out again. Then the congregation rose from their kneeling posture and began to
      move down the aisles towards the door. Many of the gas-jets were turned off; but one or
      another in Hippolyta's neighbourhood was still kept burning. She knelt and covered her face
      with her hands. Deep thought kept her immovable.</p>
<p>But ere long, when she lifted her head, she saw the preacher in his black habit and white
      surplice coming with rapid step down the church towards where she was kneeling. When he had
      arrived within a few paces of her, he turned and opened the half-doors of a tall upright
      construction in dark wood, which somewhat marred the architectural beauty of the Gothic
      building and reminded Hippolyta of the confessionals to which she had on one or two occasions
      seen people resorting in the churches of Paris and Rome.
      <pb n="47"/> It was, no doubt, a confessional. She watched the ecclesiastic enter and fasten
      the doors after him; she heard the click with which he drew aside something within; and she
      saw a man and a woman take up their position at each side, where a curtain more than
      half-concealed the kneeling figures. After a while one of them rose and went away, followed,
      at no great interval, by the other. No fresh arrivals came; and the priest, opening one of the
      upper partitions into which the doors were divided, looked out into the church and saw
      Hippolyta. She was kneeling still. He drew back, opened the other partition, and appeared as
      if sitting in a tribunal waiting till Hippolyta should come. As the fancy struck her she rose
      hastily, and without considering what she was doing, threw herself on her knees in the
      confessional. There was a wire grating between her and the priest; and all she could make out
      was the glimmering of his white surplice. In an almost inaudible whisper he muttered some
      words, the sense of which was lost on her. She did not speak; and after that one brief
      sentence neither for a time did he. At last, finding her so silent, he bent his head near the
      grating and said very distinctly, 'Will you not tell me, my child, when was your last
      confession?'</p>
<p>'I don't know,' replied Hippolyta, confused; 'I am not of your Church. I am of no Church. I
      am not a Christian.'</p>
<p>'Poor child,' said the priest, more grieved apparently than astonished; 'why do you say you
      are
      <pb n="48"/> not a Christian? Have you been unfaithful to your baptism? So have we all.'</p>
<p>Hippolyta felt encouraged by his calmness. But what had she to say?</p>
<p>'I have never been baptized,' she answered. 'I do not believe in the Christian creed. But I
      am in such trouble; and what you said to-night made me think—' There was no possibility of
      going on, she was so agitated. The priest heard her sobbing.</p>
<p>'Yes,' he said very gently after a while, 'it made you think? What did it make you think?
      Tell me.'</p>
<p>'Oh,' she replied wildly, 'I am one of those that have chosen the wrong side. Is there not a
      woman in your Gospels named Magdalene? I have been, I am now, a Magdalene.'</p>
<p>'Do you mean, my poor sister,' he said in the same calm voice, like that of a physician at
      the bedside of a patient, 'that you are living in sin?'</p>
<p>'I mean,' was the answer given with heaving breath, 'that I have scorned to believe in
      marriage, and have thought love by itself enough. My husband is not my husband; I would not
      let him marry me.'</p>
<p>'Was he willing to marry you?' inquired the priest.</p>
<p>'Yes, yes,' she said, weeping again; 'it is all my fault. It was I, in my pride and
      foolishness, that persuaded him to do evil. How shall I repair it? What must I do?'</p>
<p>'You must repent,' answered the priest gravely,
      <pb n="49"/> 'as Magdalene repented of a lesser fault. For she yielded to passion; and you, my
      sister, have perverted the very principle on which purity and all human affections rest.'</p>
<p>'How did Magdalene repent?' said Hippolyta, with a sudden flush upon her face which made
      itself felt in the darkness. 'Tell me, for the love of good, what did she do?'</p>
<p>The answer came slow and distinct, 'She followed Christ to Calvary and clung to His Cross.
      She lived and died for Him.'</p>
<p>When Hippolyta heard these words she waited for no more. Rising and turning from the
      confessional, she ran with a lightning-like speed to the door, and was lost in the night.</p>
<p>The priest looked sorrowfully after her fleeting figure and shook his head. What would
      become of the strange penitent?</p>
<p>·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·</p>
<p>Hippolyta did not go far. At first the violent agitation of her spirits made it seem
      stifling to enter a house, and she walked down the Hill until she reached the turn where it
      became the London Road. It was a cold raw evening, and chilled her to the bone; but the
      physical discomfort did her good by recalling her to the things of the lower world; and after
      wandering for some half hour, she retraced her steps till she arrived at her own door. It was
      open, and the housekeeper, who appeared to have just come in, was taking some letters out of
      the letterbox,
      <pb n="50"/> which, on seeing her mistress, she handed to her. Hippolyta looked at one of
      them. It was in her father's handwriting, redirected from Falside. The other was from Rupert.
      On seeing it a terrible feeling of sickness and misery took possession of her whole being. She
      stood under the lamp which hung in the middle of the hall ceiling, tore open the enclosure,
      and read its contents. They were brief. Rupert, in his usual tone of devoted affection,
      announced that he should be coming up to London that very day, but should arrive too late to
      come on to Forrest House. He would settle some little business next morning as early as
      possible, and she might expect him, at latest, by twelve o'clock. Hippolyta shivered, put the
      letter in her pocket, and on Mrs. Leeming's inquiry whether she would now dine, as it was
      getting late, she merely shook her head, and went slowly upstairs to her room, in which lights
      were burning. When she reached it she looked round as if in search of some object. What it was
      soon appeared. Among the many costly ivories with which her boudoir was decked Hippolyta had
      one day noticed a crucifix of exceedingly noble and finished execution, due probably to the
      hand of a Flemish artist of the Renaissance. An instinct had led her to take it down from the
      wall where it was hanging, and put it away out of sight in a drawer. She had a touch, if not
      more, of that dislike for seeing the emblem of sorrow continually before one's eyes which has
      distinguished various poets
      <pb n="51"/> and poetic natures of the century; but whether it was that or something deeper
      which had prompted her to hide it long ago—what a weary time it seemed—she would have been
      unable to say. Now she took it out again, and set it up where the strong and steady light of a
      lamp would fall upon it. Her next action was to lock the door of her chamber and draw the
      curtains across the window, so as to shut out the view of the garden,—a measure hardly needed,
      for the darkness outside was very great. Not a breath of wind stirred among the dry branches
      or the foliage of the evergreens. In the house, as all round, a perfect stillness reigned.</p>
<p>And in the silent night, amid the solitude of her own room, Hippolyta paced up and down,
      hour after hour, with the same intense self-concentration, the same sense that time was flying
      on the wings of night never to return, the same overwhelming dread of the morrow, which the
      condemned criminal must have in his prison-cell when that morrow is to see him die. Her
      thoughts were deep, confused, and overwhelming, recurring ever to the one theme which the
      preacher had handled with such portentous effect, —the guilt, the awfulness of breaking
      through the divine order. She had been so confident of her cause; and it was her cause that
      had turned against her. To spread the light had ever appeared the only ambition worthy of her
      heroic soul; but the light in her was deceptive, a mere marsh-light guiding to ruin. Instead
      of mounting the heights to which
      <pb n="52"/> she aspired, she had flung herself into the mire, and she was now become an
      object of loathing to every honest man and woman. She, Hippolyta Valence, so conscious, so
      proud of her rectitude, was fallen, polluted, horrible to think upon like the women whom she
      had styled, in the excess of a self-admiring sympathy, her sisters. The revelation of sin as
      no phantom, or superstition, or conventional metaphor, but a foul and loathsome reality, had
      come upon her like a whirlwind blackening the sky. Sin, the most unwomanly, the least
      admitting of excuse or palliation, was it then become a part of her being, a record in the
      past never to be blotted out? As in her mind she went over these things again and again,
      questioning, denying, admitting, shrinking from herself, yet not knowing how to escape into
      the sweet fresh air that, after she had been breathing it for so many months, had suddenly
      changed to miasma, her feeling was like that of a trapped wild beast; she could have raged
      against herself, and in the fury of her disdain rushed upon death as a relief. She turned with
      the thought of it flaming in her eyes; but the steady light still showed her the crucifix, and
      when her gaze went out to it, she remembered the words which described it as the image of
      supreme resignation. To kill herself would not be resignation or victory; it would be pride
      and defeat. What though she had fallen, might she not rise again? 'Oh never, never,' she cried
      in her anguish; 'the snow has been trodden into mud, the ermine is
      <pb n="53"/> stained.' Tears had been given in the church to ease her overflowing heart; but
      now she had no tears. The sweet short dream of delight was over. She might in a few hours go
      forward to meet Rupert Glanville with a smile on her face, concealing the canker-worm within.
      Did she choose to follow a desperate course, she might still feed upon the honey of these
      poisoned flowers and dare retribution. But where was the tranquillity of heart, the peace and
      loving security, which, as she now perceived, had been the foundation of her previous
      happiness? Gone, gone, never to return. Conscience had inflicted a deadly wound upon her, and
      she hung writhing on the spear. The hours fled on.</p>
<p>But why believe in what she had heard by accident? What was there in common between
      Hippolyta Valence and this religion that so imperiously divided the light from the darkness?
      There was no Satan, and Christ was dead and buried many ages ago. Suppose it a fable, a
      children's story, an arabesque on the skirt of the eternal night. Alas! it was impossible. Her
      sin had found her out; to lapse into the delusion of innocence was beyond her for evermore. In
      this fearful noonday glare she beheld the stain, as though it were the spilt blood of murder,
      spreading over her soul and soaking into it, deep, deep. When the murderer dipped his hands in
      water, they were none the less polluted, but the water became crimson, mixed with the blood
      that fell into it. So, she went on saying to herself, it
      <pb n="54"/> would be with marriage following on the loss of innocence; it could not bring
      back what was lost, it could only suffer degradation because of it. A woman was either angel
      or demon; she must be pure or impure. 'And what am I?' said Hippolyta, shuddering, as in her
      pacing to and fro she came to a standstill before that silent figure on the Cross.</p>
<p>Her anguish became unendurable. She threw open the window and looked out. All was dark and
      wintry. Through the stained glass of the lancet nearest her she seemed to distinguish a faint
      gleam as of a light still burning somewhere in the church. There were lamps, perhaps, that
      kept in all night. She could not imagine any one was there at such an hour, past one o'clock.
      Not a star was to be seen in the sky. 'How like it is to this life of mine!' she murmured with
      a sigh, as she closed the window and drew the curtain again. But a voice within seemed to make
      reply, 'Have you deserved the guidance of a star, when you have been wilful, headstrong,
      confident in the strength of your own knowledge?' and she was compelled to make a confession,
      as humiliating as it was salutary, that she had dreamt of being a sufficient light to herself.
      And what, in those arrogant days, had she known of the mighty, mysterious world? Now the veil
      was withdrawn, the tragic prospect clear. She had been made to fix her thoughts, her eyes, her
      memory, on the existences which were governed by passionate, evanescent impulses, whether of
      love or hate; the blind world
      <pb n="55"/> of instinct, she saw, stood in need of a divine reason to overrule its manifold
      contradictory tendencies. Was it not the same with the blind world of man? And how much
      blinder had she proved herself than those in whom ignorance was the outcome of incapacity or
      lack of education? Hers had been wanton, self-asserting, criminal. Was Annie Dauris not saved?
      Whose sin was that but Hippolyta's. Was Rupert, the generous, confiding, devoted Rupert,
      lowered in his own eyes, turned from the path of happiness and honour, made to share in
      turpitude of which he had never dreamt? Whose sin, whose unpardonable, damning sin was that
      but Hippolyta's? Could the murderer, the suicide, have done worse?</p>
<p>Thinking these accusing thoughts, seeing these horrible shadows trooping around her,
      discerning no way of escape, with an impetuous burst of tears Hippolyta cast herself prostrate
      on the ground before the crucifix, crying aloud again and again, amid the solitude of the
      dismal winter night, 'Oh thou unknown Christ, have pity on me!'</p>
<p>·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·</p>
<p>It was nearly twelve o'clock at noon, and the sun was shining high and bright in the
      heavens, when Rupert Glanville, his face radiant with love and happiness, dashed up in a
      hansom cab to the gates of Forrest House. He sprang out hastily, dismissed the cabman, and ran
      as if wings were carrying him along the garden path into the hall. When the housekeeper saw
      him she turned red
      <pb n="56"/> and pale. 'Where is Mrs. Malcolm?' he cried gaily. 'Is she in her room?' The
      housekeeper stood motionless, looked at him compassionately, and made no reply. He was struck
      with her silence, and his mood altered. 'Answer, woman,' he said sternly. 'Why are you
      standing there like an idiot?' She put up her hand with a pitying gesture, and faltered out,
      'Oh, sir, Mrs. Malcolm is gone.'— 'Gone!' he repeated in amaze. 'What do you mean? Gone
      where?' Then she told him that on sending the maid as usual to wake her mistress that morning,
      the girl had found the door of her bedroom wide open, the bed not slept in, and Mrs. Malcolm
      not there. It was seven o'clock when they missed her. They had searched all over the house and
      in the garden; they had sent to William Dauris, but all in vain. Not a trace of her was to be
      discovered. She seemed to have taken nothing with her but her cloak and hat.</p>
<p>Rupert ran madly upstairs, rushed into Hippolyta's boudoir, saw that everything was in
      perfect order as the servants had told him, and looked round like a man bewildered when he
      found no Hippolyta there. What had become of her? Was it a dream? He went by a natural
      instinct to her writing-table and examined the papers lying on it. They were of no importance;
      they yielded no clue. But the blotting-book was wide open, and a sealed envelope with his
      initials outside caught his eye. As he tore it crosswise, in his eagerness, a plain gold ring
      fell
      <pb n="57"/> out which he had induced Hippolyta to wear as Mrs. Malcolm, and round it a slip
      of paper. Written on the latter, in a trembling hand, were only these words, 'Rupert, we must
      part; do not seek me.' It was too true. Hippolyta had disappeared.</p>
<pb/>
</div>