<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER IV THE FACE OF AN IMMORTAL</head>
<p>Glanville looked at the paper before him. The ink was faded, and in places the
      lines were uneven; but no one could mistake the exquisite character of the hand in which they
      were traced. There was a date, which I shall not give. But the letter began abruptly.</p>
<p>'I don't know,' it said, 'by what name to address my old friend, who has perhaps injured me,
      and who no doubt thinks I have injured him. What an age it seems since I left Trelingham! And
      what an effort to write that word! I meant to have done with it until I could come back and
      claim a promise I shall never, never forget. Ah, Davenant, if you cared for me or her, if you
      could only understand how brave, how loyal-hearted she was on that day, when heaven and earth,
      her father and her religion, were against me, you would know whether a man who had once been
      assured of such an affection could surrender the
      <pb n="50"/> hope of it. But what am I doing? I may have but a moment before the fever comes
      on again and my brain takes fire. And I have something to say, a task to fulfil, if my hurt is
      not too much for me. Should I never rise off the bed where I am lying, it will be your task
      then, not mine. This letter will reach you somehow. My nurse tells me I ought not to write;
      but I must, though I were dying. The thing is so strange. Excuse these cramped lines; I can
      hardly see what I have written, my eyes pain me so. It is the blow that wild fellow gave me
      across the forehead when I would not let him,—but I am telling the tale askew. Let me try
      again.</p>
<p>'This place is called Sepúlveda. You never heard of it, I suppose. A gloomy-sounding name,
      but a grand, romantic piece of country, some forty or fifty miles from Seville, on the spur of
      a mountain-range that I can see from my window, stretching across the horizon to the north
      like the drop-scene of a theatre. I was brought here wounded, I don't know how long ago. A
      week, a month, an eternity, for all I can tell! Down below in the valley I can see, too, the
      waters of a stream where they broaden into the deep pool of San Lucar. The convent stands on
      the edge of the pool, and looks at it all day and all night; for its great ruined windows are
      all on that side. "The convent—what convent?" you ask. It is called San Lucar, I tell you.
      Ought you not, as a Tractarian, to know who San Lucar was? Did he not work miracles somewhere,
      and live in a cave, or on a
      <pb n="51"/> column, or on nothing, for a couple of centuries? Well, I cannot tell you who
      this San Lucar may have been, for it is not the evangelist, but a local deity. And he is dead,
      and his bones used to be kept in a shrine of fretted silver in a side-chapel, which, I should
      think, was always dark in spite of the lamps we saw burning all about it. Oh, my head, my
      head! I ramble on, as if I had a thousand years to tell this story.</p>
<p>'You know I became an atheist and a democrat before I left Cambridge. I don't mean to hurt
      your feelings; but the history must begin <hi>there</hi> . And when I quarrelled with Lord
      Trelingham, and went home and spent a week brooding over my prospects, the thought struck me
      that I might as well join these Spaniards, who were doing a fine anti-Christian work since
      completed by Mendizabal, where it was much wanted, expelling monks, pulling down monasteries,
      turning the priests adrift, and burning up the foul rubbish that the Inquisition had heaped
      together and made holy.'</p>
<p>Glanville, who had hesitated in his reading more than once, now came to a dead pause, and
      said to Lord Trelingham, 'Ought I to read all this? It can only give you pain.'</p>
<p>'Never mind,' said the Earl; 'I have read it too often to be pained now. There is not much
      more of it; and Valence says truly enough that it is necessary to the understanding of his
      adventure.'</p>
<p>The artist read on: 'I sailed from England three
      <pb n="52"/> days after quitting my home; and in less than a month was enrolled among the
      volunteers who fought for progress and against Don Carlos. I should like, if I had time, to
      describe some of our wild picturesque doings in the South. Never had I imagined anything so
      frantic, strange, stirring; such a droll medley of old-world romance and unwashed barbarism,
      of orange-groves, and moonlight, and harsh music, and dusty marches, and raging multitudes of
      men and women, of flying monks, and shrieking and dancing mobs, not only in the great squares,
      but in the churches and the long-inviolate cloisters; and, in brief, as mad a world, with
      furious clamours, and a high burning sun to add to the excitement, as there ever was in the
      Middle Ages. It deadened my feelings of loss to find all things around me going to ruin; and I
      was reckless and even happy.</p>
<p>'I do not mind acknowledging that the ruffian band, of which I became captain,—for promotion
      is rapid in these parts of the world,—were as savage and motley a crew as ever escaped
      hanging. I often seemed to be living over <hi>Gil Blas</hi> on a grander scale, with all the
      riff-raff of centuries gathered round me and following the tattered banner of the Revolution.
      But dirty work must be done with dirty tools. These men were good enough to pull down a system
      that was worse than themselves; for it pretended to have come from heaven, and they didn't
      much care whether they came from heaven or hell; neither did they trouble as to which of the
      two would have them by
      <pb n="53"/> and by. They hated monkery, and they liked a wild life. Certain of them, however,
      were fierce fanatics; and one of these gave me trouble enough. He was a stalwart young fellow,
      more gipsy, I should think, than genuine Spaniard. He had been a monk in Jaen, and had run
      away from his monastery as soon as he got the chance. How he delighted in breaking open
      church-gates, and smashing altars, and pulling the great images down from their pedestals! You
      will not suppose I minded that! There is only one mythology I would spare for its beauty—not
      the medieval, which is a fantastic dream,—but that calm old Greek world of loveliness, where
      the gods are the forms of Nature become breathing marble, and the heroes are daring and human,
      with their glorious limbs and fair faces. They have no place in this half-African land brooded
      over by the sultry air from Sahara, and too hot and feverish to bring forth yellow-haired
      Greeks. No, I looked on while the churches were defaced and their shrines plundered. But my
      gipsy-monk would have gone much further. He was, as you would say, no gentleman. And he took
      my reprimands as sullenly as he dared.</p>
<p>'It seems such a while, and yet again the picture is so distinct that it might have been
      yesterday, since we marched out of Seville towards San Lucar. At this moment I have before my
      eyes the stains upon a great square flagstone, near a church we passed, where a priest had
      lately been killed by the mob. Felayo, the gipsy, pointed them out to me, and said, "I wish
      <pb n="54"/> I had been there." But he added, "We shall catch some of them, if they have not
      taken to their heels, at San Lucar." For that secluded convent we were making. It was served
      by a number of clergy, who lived, all except the chaplain of the nuns, up here at Sepúlveda;
      for it was not a convent of men. What led us to make such a long expedition was the knowledge
      that San Lucar had never been spoiled, nor its cloister invaded, even by the French during the
      Peninsular War; and although its treasures were at that time hidden for safety, they had come
      to light again and were worth seizing. And then, the delight of ruining an untouched
      shrine—these were <hi>spolia opima</hi> to draw us on! We marched somewhat leisurely, as
      Southerns will; but as nobody in Seville quite knew which way we were going, and any one of a
      dozen convents might have been our attraction, we gained San Lucar without a rumour of the
      impending catastrophe reaching the good sisters. They were at their beads from morning till
      night; and, as we marched up the valley late in the afternoon, we could hear the loud voices
      of the priests chanting one of their evening services. We had come in three days, but had left
      stragglers on the road, and were now a company of a hundred and twenty. ... I cannot continue.
      The pen drops from my hand.'</p>
<p>Glanville naturally paused again. Lady May, who had given him the closest attention, said,
      in a sort of impatience, 'Please go on.' And he resumed:</p>
<p>'It is some days since I broke off,' said the manuscript;
      <pb n="55"/> 'I wonder when I shall finish, or whether I shall at all. I have been asleep,
      they tell me, and raving a good deal in an unknown tongue. No one here understands English.
      But they have caught a name which I seemed to be incessantly repeating—her name! <hi>Ay de
       mi</hi> ! Let me make an end. But what are the words that some one is faintly singing under
      my window? I can just make them out. Apt enough they sound to me,—listen— "'Las venas con poca
      sangre, Los ojos con mucha noche." Little blood in the veins, and heavy night upon the
      eyelids. I must hasten while I may. We did nothing that evening except to keep the passes of
      the valley. It was known outside the convent that we had come, and why; but the peasants had
      been cowed by the revolutionary frenzy of the towns, and we neither expected resistance nor
      much cared if it were attempted. We were stirring next day with the sun. What a glorious
      morning broke over the valley and the stream, and drove back the darkness towards the
      mountains as with a single sweep of some glittering sword in heaven! Such a clear light came
      over the white monastery walls, and was reflected from the lake as we marched up to the huge
      wooden gates that divided the cloister from the world without. Felayo beat upon them with his
      thundering club, which had shattered so many before. But they stood unshaken, and we saw that
      if we were to enter at that point we must
      <pb n="56"/> open with a regular assault. As we hesitated to begin one of the men cried out
      that the church doors would be easier. That great building stood outside the cloister and
      opened on the public highway. We marched hastily towards it; and what was our surprise when we
      drew near to distinguish the solemn sounds of choral chanting and organ accompaniment within!
      "They are singing Mass," cried Felayo; "I suppose they would like to win the crown of
      martyrdom, as their good ancestors did when the wicked Moors slew them;" and again he raised
      his club, this time with effect, against the sacred gates. One blow drove in the rusty lock, a
      second and a third, aided by the pikes of the rest, broke the framework in pieces, and with
      yells of rage and triumph the men rushed in.</p>
<p>'Far away, in the dim light, we saw the priests in their vestments at the altar, and ranged
      on each side in the stalls choristers in white, holding books from which, though now in
      trembling tones, they were singing. Just as we entered the voices fell silent; the organ,
      which stood away in some recess, took up a softer strain; and I saw the chief priest kneel,
      then rise again quickly, and lift up the host on high to be adored by the prostrate throng. As
      if maddened at the sight, Felayo, who had paused a moment, went wildly up the church, calling
      on us to follow, leaped the silver altar-rails, and struck down the priest where he stood. In
      an instant all was confusion. Felayo swept the sacred vessels from
      <pb n="57"/> the altar; and, as the choristers ran out from their stalls in deadly terror,
      some to rescue the priest from being trampled on, others to take up their holy things which
      lay on the ground, and one or two of the bolder spirits to thrust back Felayo, I looked up and
      beheld that miscreant standing on the altar like a conquering demon. Hideous he seemed, with
      swarthy face and malignant flashing eyes, his arm again uplifted for destruction, and his
      voice ringing through the church in a defiant shriek. And as I lifted my eyes the clear
      morning light came in through the windows of the chancel, flooding the space above him; and I
      saw, as in a vision of glory, a face that I knew, with an expression that was all tenderness
      and divine tranquillity, shining down on the confusion unmoved, and a host of figures in
      glorious raiment about it. "Alice!" I cried, and sprang upon the altar, as Felayo lifted his
      head and caught sight of the picture. For it was a picture, not a vision or a dream. Above the
      altar, like the tutelary saint of the place, depicted in mysterious attitude and with the
      symbolism of some Catholic doctrine, Alice, whom I had left in England, of whom I dreamt day
      and night, was before my eyes; and her glance seemed to go through my very heart. I stood
      bewildered; the next moment I was recalled to myself by Felayo's voice, as he thundered out,
      "Ho, comrades, mount up here and pull down this Virgin of the monks." I caught him by the
      throat and flung him to the ground, leaping after him as he
      <pb n="58"/> fell. "Down, dog," I shouted; "you shall not touch the picture." He was so taken
      aback by the unexpected assault that for a little while he stared at me without answering.
      Then, gathering himself up for a spring, he strove to get from under my hand; but I held him
      fast by the throat, and while the others came round in amazement, I cried out, "You may pull
      the church to pieces and plunder what you will, but this Madonna remains sacred. I claim it
      for myself." I cannot say what they thought of me, but none were so fanatical as the gipsy,
      and they seemed to respect my whim, for they drew back and began to form into parties to
      despoil the rest of the church and invade the convent. Even whilst I knelt with Felayo in my
      grasp, I could see the nuns, who were separated by a carved screen from the body of the
      church, as they stood shivering in the midst of their cloistered aisle, uncertain whether to
      flee or remain. Felayo turned himself under me. "Let me go," he said; "I will not touch your
      accursed picture."—"Do you promise?" I asked. He answered through his teeth, "Yes, I promise."
      I allowed him to rise to his feet; but, no sooner had he done so, than, drawing his sword, he
      slashed me across the forehead, and had not my peaked cap partly warded the blow, that would
      have been the end of Edgar Valence. I was, however, only half-stunned, and with a rapidity
      equal to his own, I drove the sword I held in my hand through the villain's heart. With a
      frightful roar of pain he fell dead beside the priest whose life, in
      <pb n="59"/> the crush and confusion, had been trampled out of him.</p>
<p>'Meanwhile, the invaders were breaking down the cloister, tearing from their places silver
      lamps and the precious gates of the various shrines, rending the vestments to pieces, and
      hurling the great crucifixes to the ground. The noise, the riot, were indescribable. I
      appointed a couple of men to guard the high altar; and seeing what was likely to happen now
      the soldiers were getting infuriated, I made my way over the fallen screen into the nuns'
      cloister, and endeavoured to restore a little order amid the confusion. I told the sisters
      they were free to depart, but that resistance was impossible. If they wished to be dealt with
      kindly, let them go to Sepúlveda and prepare lodgings and refreshments for the wounded, of
      whom there were several on both sides. For the younger priests, when their blood was up, did
      not hesitate to grapple with the soldiers. There is always in the Spanish temper a wild devil
      to be roused; and these sons of the sanctuary were as eager for the fray as their assailants,
      after they had seen their mass interrupted and the priest flung down. But they had no weapons,
      except the fragments of the woodwork and church furniture; and in no long time they were
      overpowered. When the high altar was understood to be my share of the spoils, a general rush
      was made towards the chapel of San Lucar. I followed out of curiosity, for I could not bring
      myself to lay a profane hand upon anything in a place where
      <pb n="60"/> Alice seemed to be gazing at me, and with her heavenly presence reproving my
      unhallowed thoughts. I saw the shrine dismantled, the dust of the saint scattered where his
      worshippers had knelt for ages to ask his intercession, the lamps quenched and borne away by
      the soldiery, the huge windows broken, and the church from end to end made a wreck,—all things
      in it ruined save the exquisite vision looking down upon the high altar. The men ate and drank
      about the place, and jeered their prisoners, and would have quarrelled over the spoil, had not
      an order come towards mid-day from Seville, directing us to quit the convent and take up our
      quarters in Sepúlveda.</p>
<p>'I was greatly embarrassed, for I would not leave the portrait of Alice to the mercy of the
      new imagebreakers; and yet go we must. In this perplexity, one of the wounded priests
      whispered to me that, if I wished to save the Virgin, there was a secure place under the altar
      where it might be hidden. Let me send the rest away and he would show me. I thought the matter
      out for a while. We could not get the wounded to Sepúlveda without mules, of which we had very
      few. Whatever was to be done must be done at once; but to stay for the wounded could not be an
      infringement of orders. I sent men off to find means of transport; and, keeping only three
      whom I knew to be loyal fellows, when the church was cleared I bade the priest show me the
      hiding-place of which he spoke. He was badly hurt, but he contrived to reach the altar, and
      <pb n="61"/> touching the great slab at which mass had been said, he made it move out of its
      place noiselessly. There was a dry vault underneath, and several huge coffers in it where
      treasure had once been stored. If the altar were broken down, the vault would be discovered;
      otherwise, it was safe enough. We unfastened the great picture, not without difficulty, from
      its place on the wall; covered it with remnants of the heavy silk hangings; and were so
      fortunate as to come upon a chest which would hold it under lock and key. I took possession of
      the key, which is now under my pillow, and will never leave me till the picture is removed to
      some fitter resting-place. The priest explained to me the secret of the spring; and the great
      slab, revolving once more, concealed from the returning soldiery what we had done.</p>
<p>'They were anxious to get off with their booty; we left the convent—bare, a habitation for
      the beasts of the field, and a shelter for owls and other night-birds; and by the evening our
      men were lodged in Sepúlveda. My head was aching from the sword-stroke of Felayo; I could get
      no farther than the farmhouse where I am now lying. I know that I have had an attack of
      brain-fever. The detachment I commanded has gone, I cannot say on what errand; for it went in
      haste, leaving me to my fate. These good nuns look upon me as a guardian angel; all they saw
      was that I protected their Madonna from destruction and themselves from insult. They are not
      aware that I helped to overturn many a shrine
      <pb n="62"/> before I came to San Lucar. They tell me I have been near dying. Why not? Should
      I live, is there any prospect for me? The vision of Alice forbids me to join my old
      companions; I cannot bear to think that I might see her face again, looking down on me in the
      next sanctuary I profaned. All I desire is to rescue the canvas whereon she breathes and
      lives, and return with it to England. If I die before this can be accomplished, I charge you
      to see to it. The convent will never be dwelt in again; and you will have small difficulty in
      securing this miraculous piece of driftwood. What its history may be, I do not know. I have
      been too weak to put any questions about it; and these sisters, though well-meaning, are
      extremely ignorant. I doubt that they could tell me the true story; legends, of course, they
      have in plenty.</p>
<p>'Davenant, if I get well, you must prepare Lord Trelingham to receive me, if only once,
      within his threshold. I will not entrust the portrait of Alice to another. But when I have put
      it into his hands, I will turn again and he shall see me no more until he welcomes me as his
      daughter's husband.</p>
<p>'Thank the kind fates that have suffered me to write this. I am dead tired. I shall sleep
      now; and perhaps never waken. But this letter, at all events, will reach you. Say to Alice,—ah
      no, you will give her no message from me. I hear the voice singing again the self-same words
      beneath my window—
      <pb n="63"/> "Las venas con poco sangre, Los ojos con mucha noche, Lo halló en el campo
      aquella, Vida y muerte de los hombres." How pretty these old Spanish romances are! But it was
      not in the field that either love or death found me; yet, weak though I may be, I am strong
      enough to meet my fate, come when and how it will.</p>
<p>E. V.'</p>
<p>There was no other signature.</p>
<pb/>
</div>