<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER V BUT THOU TO ME ART MORE THAN ALL!</head>
<p>' <hi>Was</hi> I not right,' said the Earl, 'in calling that a strange letter? As you have
      read it to me, so did I read it to my father, keeping an anxious eye on the door at which Lady
      Alice had gone out, and every moment dreading her return. What could we say to her? Was it
      possible to hide Valence's danger, or the likelihood of his arrival at Trelingham? Breaking a
      heavy silence, my father observed, "This has taken almost a year to reach its destination.
      Should Valence be still living, we must expect him in England soon; nor can I decline to
      accept, even from his hands, a portrait which has long been wanting in our gallery." I looked
      at him in surprise. "What!" I said; "has not Valence dreamt the whole story? His letter was
      written during an access of brain-fever; and must we not suppose that his constant brooding on
      the loss of my sister, combined with reminiscences of the legend of Lady Elizabeth, has
      <pb n="65"/> shaped his fancies to this extraordinary result?" —"No," replied my father;
      "Valence must have done what he describes. Either he never knew or has forgotten the story of
      Lady Elizabeth. You see he does not once refer to it."'</p>
<p>'And may I ask,' said Glanville, 'what is the legend of Lady Elizabeth?'</p>
<p>'I will tell you,' replied his host. 'Ours, my dear Mr. Glanville, is not itself a very
      ancient peerage. It dates from Charles II., when Sir William Davenant became Viscount Davenant
      and Earl of Trelingham. But in his wife was represented a much older line; and it was chiefly
      by reason of his marriage with her that Sir William was raised to the House of Lords. She was
      the last of that old West Country stock, the Trelinghams of Trelingham. Her father died abroad
      during the usurpation of Cromwell; and his brothers—the family were Roman Catholic—had taken
      orders at Rome and St. Omer, but died before him. Hence the title of Trelingham became
      extinct. But Lady Elizabeth inherited in her own right the estates which had gone with it; and
      she was in a convent when her father died. The family chronicles add that the convent was in
      Spain, but not the name or precise situation. She was on the point of taking the veil, and had
      she done so, there is no doubt the estates of Trelingham would have passed to the
      Commonwealth. She was persuaded, therefore, to return home. Her nearest relative, a Protestant
      cousin, sought her hand; but
      <pb n="66"/> he was grasping and ambitious, and twenty years older than the lady. She refused
      him, and bestowed herself and Trelingham on Sir William Davenant, who, though not of her
      faith, was chivalrous enough to respect it. She loved him so well that, in course of time, she
      joined our communion, and her children were brought up in the doctrine of the English Church.
      She died young, however, and the story ran that she repented of having changed her religion.
      Certain it is that a mystery attached to Lady Elizabeth—the name by which she was usually
      designated in honour of the ancient line. She would never allow her portrait to be painted;
      and when I was a boy its place in the gallery—at the very spot where we are now sitting—was
      indicated by a purple veil on which in black letter was inscribed the name of Elizabeth,
      Countess of Trelingham, with the dates of her birth and decease. What was the explanation?
      Well, here Valence's story came in. It was said that, when a girl at her Spanish convent, Lady
      Elizabeth had been chosen, by a painter whose name we never heard, to represent the Virgin in
      a great altar-piece; and that an instinct of reverence, mingled perhaps with remorse,
      determined her never to allow, for ends of pride or vanity, that countenance to be depicted by
      a worldly artist, which had been dedicated to religion and enshrined above an altar. We did
      not often repeat the legend; we had no picture to show, and assuredly we did not dream that a
      resemblance existed between the features of my sister and those
      <pb n="67"/> of her far-away ancestress. Valence's letter was a revelation.</p>
<p>'While we talked Lady Alice came back, looking so pale that I ran to her, expecting her to
      faint in my arms. She thanked me in a feeble voice, but declared that she was strong enough to
      bear anything save uncertainty. I gave her the letter; she sat down and was absorbed in it,
      reading with eager haste, turning back sometimes as though fearing to lose a word, and quite
      unmindful of our presence. She uttered no exclamation when he spoke of seeing her above the
      altar; she was too intent on the sequel, and I dreaded to see her come to his last words. As
      she did so a fit of shuddering seized her. But with a strong effort she mastered her emotion,
      and saying only, "I will wait, I will wait," she let the paper fall to her feet and came and
      put her arms about our father's neck. "Papa," she said, "do not fear me; I will be a good
      daughter. Only let, let Edgar come. He will not be so unbelieving then. See how this strange
      thing has softened him. By and by he will follow your advice, and we shall be happy." Her
      voice broke, her eyes streamed with tears. "Very well," my father replied, "if he comes I will
      see him. But you must be patient."—"I will, I will," she whispered, and took up the letter
      again and was lost in it.</p>
<p>'Patience! It was a wise word. The months passed and he did not arrive. My sister was
      falling into a decline, my father hastening to his grave;
      <pb n="68"/> and, I confess it with shame, I had fierce thoughts about Edgar Valence. Why did
      he not write? But perhaps he had expired at Sepúlveda. I did not think so. I hated him.</p>
<p>'On a dark cold evening in November, when the snow was lying deep, my father breathed his
      last. We buried him on the bleak hillside, which looks almost as cold and dark this morning.'
      And, interrupting himself, the Earl pointed out to Glanville where the old gray church of
      Trelingham rose up from the precipitous shore, with the green churchyard and the mounds of the
      dead on every side of it. He resumed: 'The next day, late in the afternoon, as I was seated in
      my study, and Lady Alice was reclining in her own room, too much exhausted to move, a stranger
      was announced. He gave no name I bade them show him into the drawing-room. I entered, and my
      eyes fell on Edgar Valence. Through the windows I could see that it was snowing fast.</p>
<p>'He stood wrapt in furs, bareheaded, and immovable, with the scar quite plain on his
      forehead. When he saw me, his movement testified surprise. "I asked to see Lord Trelingham,"
      he murmured. Then he observed that I wore deep mourning. "Is any one dead?" he cried
      excitedly; "is Alice—?" I interrupted him. "Lord Trelingham is dead, not my sister. What is
      you business, Mr. Valence?" The words were cold and unfriendly, but I was much moved. He
      looked like one risen from the grave; his soldierly bearing could not disguise the feebleness
      <pb n="69"/> of his health. He had suffered, and the sword-stroke of Felayo had been almost
      fatal. But he must not see Alice. "Did my letter from Sepúlveda reach you?" he inquired. "Yes;
      but why did you not write again?" He smiled. "When I quitted my farmhouse," he said, "I took
      service in the regular army. I was wounded again, taken prisoner, carried into Estremadura,
      and did not escape till seven weeks ago. Why should I have written? Would Alice have seen my
      letters?"</p>
<p>"'I do not know," was my answer; "but had you come in my father's lifetime, for her sake he
      would have granted you an interview. He would have done no more; and, Valence, unless you are
      changed neither will I."</p>
<p>'He answered, alas! in his old firm voice, "I am not changed; do not think it. Nor is my
      love for Alice."</p>
<p>'"Be it so," was my reply, "then you may look for the same course from me that my father
      would have pursued."</p>
<p>'"And what is that, may I ask?"</p>
<p>'I knew very well the answer I meant to give. It was imperative on me as a son and a
      Christian; but it would cost me a sharp pang to utter it, when I thought of my poor sister
      lying dangerously ill, without heart or hope, and the desolate future before us. I delayed the
      fatal moment. Instead of replying, I said to Valence, "Did you return to San Lucar, as you
      hoped?"—"Return?" he cried; "had I not
      <pb n="70"/> returned and brought away the portrait, do you think I should have ventured
      hither to-day? The picture is waiting at your lodge gates. Will you receive it? Will you tell
      some of your servants to bring it up? Do you know anything about it?"</p>
<p>'I told him the story as briefly as I could. He was surprised and attentive. "Why," he said,
      "this, if I believed in a special Providence, should be a decisive intimation that Alice and I
      were made for one another. You grant it, surely, Davenant."</p>
<p>'I shook my head. "There are coincidences," I answered, "which have an evil purport. I
      cannot think, if you are unchanged, that this will come to good."</p>
<p>'I gave the order he suggested. While we sat speechless—for what could we touch upon that
      would not be painful?—awaiting the return of the servants with the picture, I became more and
      more uneasy lest my sister should come in. And what was to be the end? On such a night I could
      not turn my bitterest enemy from the door. Edgar Valence to sleep at Trelingham Court, the
      night after my father's funeral! It was strange, it was most undesirable, yet I saw no way out
      of it. I could not help asking him, "How long have you been in England? My father's death was
      announced six days ago."</p>
<p>"'Very likely," he replied; "I landed at Plymouth that very day, and came with the utmost
      speed hither. At first I thought of preparing you for my arrival. But you might have declined
      seeing me, and I judged
      <pb n="71"/> it better to take you by surprise and trust to the generous impulses"—he spoke
      with frank courtesy; how winning I used to think it!—"which have always seemed to me inherent
      in the family of Trelingham. I saw no one—I was not aware of your father's illness, much less
      of what has happened."</p>
<p>'The men were coming in slowly with their burden. I could not but think, as the door opened,
      of another and a sad burden that had been carried out yesterday. I would not have them stay in
      the hall, or go up to the picture-gallery; and the tall package was set up against a bookcase
      in my study. Lamps were kindled, and Valence and I, with equal agitation, tore off the
      coverings, and the Madonna of San Lucar broke upon my view. At first, like Valence, I saw
      nothing of the accessories which are all that is now left of the painting. It was the face I
      sought; and oh! how strangely it resembled Alice when she was yet untouched by grief and all
      her thoughts were of the innocent home in which she had been brought up, or of the heavenly
      world that religion unfolded to her. I gazed and gazed. Can you realise what it is to have the
      dead beautiful past resuscitated, as at a stroke—the past, which you deemed irrevocable? I
      felt pity and deep regret, and a kind of protest that these things should be—a young life
      faded and marriage impossible. The fate of Alice, of Edgar Valence himself, scarred and maimed
      as he came before me, our friendship turned to estrangement— it was too much. I knew not how
      to speak, or what
      <pb n="72"/> to do; and when Valence, laying his hand on my shoulder, said, "Do you think I
      can live without seeing her?—have pity on me," I could only reply that in the morning they
      should meet, and then—then, if she held to her promise, I would do all that a brother
      should.</p>
<p>'On this understanding we parted for the night. I went to my own chamber, he to his, but
      there was no sleep for either of us. How was I to reconcile my father's wishes and the honour
      of a family which had ever been true to Church and King, with the opinions, the character, the
      inclinations of Valence? Lord Trelingham, it is true, had exacted no promise from me; and my
      sister, though not of age, wanted so few months of it that to all intents she might be deemed
      her own mistress. But the very existence of our house was at stake. Who could say that the
      succession to name and property would not pass to my sister's issue? There was no other
      relative but a distant cousin, and he unmarried, and what if her children were brought up
      atheists and democrats? I shuddered at the thought, and my former resolution shone out in the
      clearest light of reason as of religious duty. But, on the other side, was my sister's
      happiness, perhaps her life.</p>
<p>'With the morning came another anxiety. How was I to prepare Alice for the surprise, the
      tumultuous joy, that she would undoubtedly feel, and for all the momentous issues that hung
      upon the next few hours! Her feeble health, endangered by mental anguish so
      <pb n="73"/> long endured, would give way under this new strain were she to meet it without
      warning. I hastened to Valence's room. He was already dressed, and his fatigued look showed me
      that he had slept as little as I. In a few words I begged him to wait upstairs till I sent for
      him. He understood and made no demur. I inquired after Lady Alice, and was told that she was
      too weak to come down to the breakfast-room. I now sent her a message requesting her to meet
      me in the picture-gallery at half-past ten. There was no time to lose. Summoning a skilful
      workman and a couple of servants to help him, I ordered the Madonna of San Lucar to be
      conveyed noiselessly to its destined place among the family portraits, and fixed with the
      utmost expedition. My directions were carried out. When the appointed hour came the picture
      was hanging on the wall, and the dark curtain which had so long marked its absence alone
      concealed it from view. My sister entered the gallery, and came to me looking weary and
      distracted. I took her by the hand, asked her an indifferent question or two, and led her to
      speak of her own feelings. When we had reached the spot where I am now telling this story I
      induced her to sit down, and continued the conversation till, in a pause I intentionally made,
      she looked round and saw that the curtain did not hang as usual. She looked again steadfastly,
      and with agitated voice and manner asked me what was behind it. I answered as lightly as I
      could, "Do you think Lady Elizabeth's portrait
      <pb n="74"/> is there?" Quicker than thought she divined my meaning; her hand was on the
      curtain, she drew it aside, and, sinking on her knees, exclaimed, "He is come; Edgar is come.
      Oh, God be thanked!" She gave way to a burst of weeping, which I thought it prudent to
      indulge, saying, when she was grown calmer, "Alice, do you think you can bear to see him?"
      What an expression was on her countenance as she rose up and faced me! "Have I lived," she
      cried, "for anything else?" The colour came into her cheeks while she spoke, and her breathing
      was like that of a fever-patient, short and difficult. She almost fell back into her chair,
      but recovering, bade me tell Valence that she would see him here and now. I did not venture to
      leave her alone. I rang for a servant, and gave him the message that Valence had been all
      these hours expecting in his room upstairs. A step was heard coming down, a slow but
      determined step, which we hardly knew. I motioned Alice to sit still, and went to the door;
      but no sooner had Valence appeared than my sister flew to him, and they were clinging to one
      another in a long embrace. I moved away towards the new-found portrait of Lady Elizabeth; the
      same feeling which had inspired me seemed to take hold of them, and we found ourselves, for
      the first and last time in our lives, united before the Madonna of San Lucar.</p>
<p>'The first and last! One happy moment we had, and then the struggle began again—if struggle
      it could be called, which was all on my side and most unwilling.
      <pb n="75"/> I knew that whenever Alice should perceive the physical helplessness to which
      Valence was reduced, the argument for affection would be strengthened a thousand-fold. It was
      pretty and exceedingly touching to witness how, on observing his scarred forehead, she clung
      to him more closely, looking at him again and again with a sort of motherly tenderness. Her
      tears flowed silently, but she smiled, and, in more cheerful tones than I had heard for many
      months, she exclaimed, "Well, brother, you see that all is clear now. I cannot leave this poor
      Edgar. He has waited and suffered, and he has my promise. Poor Edgar!" And she fondly repeated
      the words as if caressing a child. I was overcome, but not wholly. Valence, still encircling
      her with his arm, said to me, "Davenant, love is stronger than death," and he gave me a
      half-mocking, half-melancholy smile. I will not relate the discussion that followed. On my
      sister it was impossible to make an impression; but from Valence I demanded a solemn
      engagement that he would bring up his children in their ancestral faith, and allow me, or some
      one whom he might name, to be their guardian. Alice kept her eyes fixed on him, and I question
      whether she comprehended a syllable of our dispute. It was in vain. At last I reminded Valence
      of the dignities inseparable from the House of Trelingham, which it was my bounden duty to
      preserve unimpaired. "And do you think," he answered, "that I believe more in your titles and
      laws of inheritance than I do in you traditional religion?
      <pb n="76"/> What an idiot I should be! No, Davenant; when your sister accepts my hand she
      breaks, I do not say with the affection of her kindred, but with the delusive greatness they
      call theirs. She will be no longer Lady Alice; and you may rely upon it, no child of mine will
      claim the title or estates, or will touch a stiver belonging to the House of Trelingham. I
      have enough to live upon; and if I had not, a man can earn his bread. With your sister's
      beliefs I do not interfere; it is too late, and she could renounce them only to be unhappy.
      But these things," he went on, looking scornfully round the gallery and waving his hand
      towards the long line of pictures, "I think she will give up these without shedding tears over
      them. Will you not, darling?"</p>
<p>'Her only answer was to hide her face in his bosom. I could say no more. I turned and went
      in silence out of the gallery. I knew not with which of them I felt the more indignant. Both
      were obstinate, perverse, unreasonable. The rest of the day I spent among my books. At dinner
      Lady Alice informed me that Valence was gone, but I made no remark. During the few weeks she
      remained at Trelingham we met as seldom as possible. A month later she went away. The
       <hi>Times</hi> announced, in regular form, that Colonel Edgar Valence and Lady Alice Davenant
      were married at a London church, and from that hour my sister was lost to me. Her I never
      beheld again; but her tomb—you may see it beside my father's in Trelingham churchyard. There
      Colonel Valence had
      <pb n="77"/> her interred, I know not in what year, for I was abroad and we never exchanged a
      line, but it must be eight and twenty years ago, before my daughter was born. Whether they had
      any children, how they lived, or in what way my poor sister died, I could never learn.'</p>
<pb/>
</div>