<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER XXXIV HYMEN, O HYMENÆE!</head>
<p>The announcement which Madame de Lutenieff had mockingly foretold—of a marriage
      between the well-known artist and the daughter of a great peer —was delayed until Rupert had
      fulfilled his task and the frescoes were complete. They made a magnificent show, but he
      entreated that their formal exhibition to the world might not take place until Lady May and
      himself had quitted Trelingham. He could not bear to be congratulated. He knew that the work
      was equal to anything achieved in England of late years; and he thought it would speak for
      itself to those who had eyes in their heads. It was part of his strangeness that he never
      referred to the memorable evening of the ball at which, for the first and last time, he had
      danced with Hippolyta. Some allusion was necessarily made to the <hi>tableaux vivants</hi> ,
      but from him it drew no response. Had he forgotten, or was he acting a part? Ivor, staying by
      express
      <pb n="213"/> invitation from the Earl, who perceived that Glanville derived much benefit from
      his company, was convinced that the fever had passed a sponge not only over Hippolyta's name,
      but over the scenes wherein she had appeared. He dreaded accidental references to her, and
      sought occasion one day to whisper in the ear of the Earl's daughter that if she desired
      Rupert's continuance in the health he was enjoying, she must be careful not to mention
      Falside, or any one connected with it. In surprise she asked the reason. He thought it best to
      reply, with seeming frankness, that Glanville's attack of fever was due to an accident he had
      sustained near the cottage; that during his delirium the least allusion to place or people
      made him much worse; and that she might notice for herself how completely he kept silence
      about them since he had recovered. Lady May thanked him. She remembered now that the name of
      Colonel Valence or his daughter had not been heard from Rupert's lips during the past months.
      Ivor begged her to warn Lord Trelingham. She did so, and the tacit consent was renewed which
      for years had banished the name of Valence from conversation at the Court.</p>
<p>There was considerable stir in the great world when their engagement became known. It had
      then existed nearly six months, and the marriage was to take place before Lent. This was a
      stipulation of Lord Trelingham's, to which his daughter willingly acceded, as likewise to the
      arrangement whereby all
      <pb n="214"/> the glory of it was to overshadow his favourite church, St. Ethelfleda's, in
      Duke's Lane. The ecclesiastical ceremonies would be elaborate, and some of them, it was
      thought, illegal; but on these points the Earl admitted of no compromise. Rupert assented
      languidly. He could have wished to be married on the Continent; but if that might not be,
      anywhere was better than Trelingham. The settlements involved less delay than usual. Lady
      May's interest in the Earl's entailed property was slight; and her personal fortune, though
      smaller than it would have been in more skilful hands than her father's, was perfectly safe,
      and included neither land nor houses. Rupert was, if anything, the wealthier of the two. His
      solicitor drew up a lucid inventory of his goods and belongings; among them was Forrest House,
      now let at a handsome figure to a tenant who held it on a seven years' lease. Lady May
      observed the name; she was acquainted with the neighbourhood, and asked Rupert what sort of
      place Forrest House might be. He answered in very few words, telling her it had belonged to
      his grand-aunt, and he had not seen it since spending his holidays there when a boy. 'It must
      be worth a visit,' she said. 'No,' he replied absently. The conversation drifted to something
      else.</p>
<p>It was a brilliant wedding, and St. Ethelfleda's was thronged. Ivor, invited to act as
      Rupert's best man, declined, alleging that he should feel absurdly out of place; and he
      contented himself with being
      <pb n="215"/> a spectator. There was no lack of 'best men' among the artist's acquaintance,
      including that particular one of his <hi>confrères</hi> who had first given Lady May an
      account of him. The bridesmaids were, what they are always said to be on such occasions,
      charming; the ceremonies as elaborate as they could be made, the crowd of carriages great, the
      wedding-march thrilling, the wedding-breakfast artistically splendid. Rupert, as more than one
      of his friends observed, was grave and still. 'He is subdued before marriage,' said a cynic;
      'well, as lief sune as syne; all men are subdued after it.' In returning thanks for the way
      they had drunk Lady May Glanville's health— she blushed at the new name—he was felicitous, as
      they expected, but not so bright as many had known him to be. The ceremony was over, the scene
      vanished. Lady May and her husband, accompanied by the Earl, whom they insisted on taking with
      them, went by easy stages to Florence, and travelled during the next half-year up and down
      Italy. Tom Davenant, before their engagement was published, had found a shooting companion and
      was now in the Rocky Mountains. The Earl wrote to him at San Francisco, where he was in course
      of time to spend a few weeks. And Ivor Mardol returned to his engravings in Grafton Place. He
      had broken with his society; he was watched, suspected, but otherwise let alone.</p>
<p>·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·</p>
<p>In the old stories a year and a day was the fated
      <pb n="216"/> period when happiness or misfortune came to an end. Will happiness last so long?
      Lady May would have returned to that inquiry a triumphant answer in the affirmative on the
      morning that she and her husband bade farewell to Florence, after a sojourn which had
      continued, with pleasant interruptions, some eighteen months. With her it was still the
      honeymoon. There had been flecks of cloud in her untroubled sky, but they did not linger; they
      melted quickly into the blue, leaving her the most contented wife in Christendom. Her father's
      delicate health was a trial, which he lightened for the married pair by a cheerful countenance
      and a resignation corresponding to his inward hopes. Tom Davenant, won by the Earl's
      solicitations,—he could not bear to see the young man wandering over the face of the
      earth,—had come back from America, and was now on his way to meet them at Nice. They proposed
      to spend a few weeks there and in the neighbourhood, exploring, as the season grew milder,
      those dead cities along the coast which neither Rupert nor Lady May had seen. Afterwards they
      would extend their travels, according as the Earl could bear it, into Spain, as far as
      Valencia. They did not know exactly how their course would lie. The charm of travelling, said
      Glanville, is to have no plans; there is nothing like the unforeseen. Perhaps Cousin Tom would
      accompany them.</p>
<p>The inspired artist had been quiescent in our friend since his wedding-day. He studied
      pictures,
      <pb n="217"/> and sharpened his powers of criticism; but he painted very seldom, sketching a
      scene or a head that took his fancy, working for two or three hours, and then throwing down
      his pencil with an air of fatigue. This was one of the flecks of cloud that rose in the heaven
      of his wife's content. He would be absorbed, too, in his thoughts, and not speak for a whole
      morning; sometimes his sleep was broken, he had bad dreams, and could not always remember
      where they had been staying a few days earlier. But his love was not to be doubted. Though he
      never went into the raptures which his eager disposition should have demanded, he was grateful
      and protecting, full of quiet tenderness, and never separated from her during the twenty-four
      hours. They did not go much into society or receive many friends; but apart from Lady May,
      Rupert had no amusement. Once at the reception of a Roman princess, to which Rupert had taken
      her chiefly to see the marbles, which were famous, they found themselves, in the crowded
      rooms, face to face with the Duke of Adullam. He had known Lady May in his time of innocence,
      and he at once accosted Glanville. The artist gave him an inquiring look, and said with
      embarrassment, 'Pardon me, sir. I seem to recollect your face, but I cannot tell where it was
      we met.' The Duke, who, as I have remarked, was admirably quick in divining other men's
      thoughts, supposed that Rupert was feigning. He smiled, and murmured under his breath,'This is
      needless;' then raising his voice, said
      <pb n="218"/> pleasantly, 'We shall meet again,' and passed on. 'Who is it?' inquired the
      artist of Lady May. 'The Duke of Adullam,' she answered, wondering in her own mind where they
      could have known one another. 'I must have met him somewhere in society,' said her husband. It
      was the only time they met abroad.</p>
<p>May Glanville was jealous of her husband's fame, and, while they were at Nice expecting Tom
      Davenant, she began to urge him, somewhat vehemently, to resume his painting. He replied,'I
      have no inspiration. The spirit has gone out of me. I could not design a fresh drawing to save
      my life.'—'Why not finish what you have commenced?' she said; 'there are portfolios of
      drawings in our room. Shall I send for them?' He was willing, but not interested. The drawings
      were brought down, and Lady May began to turn them over. 'This seems nearly perfect,' she
      said, holding the largest of them out to him. He took it in silence. It was a water-colour.
      'When did I paint that?' he muttered to himself. 'May, is not this the cascade at Falside?' He
      seemed to be searching in his memory. 'No one could mistake it,' she answered; 'don't you
      remember going over several times from Trelingham to sketch there?'— 'No,' he said, shaking
      his head; 'I often think I must have forgotten what I did that year; it is all so dim.' His
      wife, mindful of Ivor's warning, and terrified at the change in his expression, took the
      sketch and hid it away. He would not paint that morning, and they went down to the sea. After
      <pb n="219"/> dinner he asked to look at the drawing again, but it could not be found. His
      mind seemed busy with it while he slept, and he awoke several times in the night with sobs
      choking him. Lady May was in consternation. She never urged him to paint again.</p>
<p>Tom Davenant's arrival gave them pleasanter occupation. He was still the wild huntsman, nor
      had he lost that boyish innocence which made his talk, though neither witty nor profound, so
      engaging. A life of adventure could not take away the ruddy and white of his countenance; the
      feminine beauty and the open beaming eyes had in nothing altered. But his bearing was more
      manly; he dwelt a little on the social aspect of landed property, and said he should take Ivor
      Mardol's advice what to do about his tenants when he got back to Foxholme. He was reserved and
      courteous with Lady May, spent most of his time with the Earl, and seemed struck with the
      alteration in Glanville, whom he had never set eyes on since the coming of age. 'Brain fever
      must be a peculiar thing,' he remarked; 'I should not have known Glanville.'</p>
<p>He readily consented to accompany them on their tour. You could get riding and shooting in
      Spain of an uncommonly good sort; and the fishing, a man told him in America, was superb, if
      you knew where to look for it. They must be careful of the season, that was all. And he helped
      Glanville to draw out what they called a fever time-table, showing when the air was deadly to
      foreigners in the various provinces.
      <pb n="220"/> Lord Trelingham, though not a rapid, was a good traveller. Rupert did not care
      how long the journeys took. His sole desire was not to return to England. He would have liked
      Ivor to join them; but Ivor was now working hard to keep himself alive and had sold his genius
      to a newspaper. He did not meddle with Socialism, nor had he entered a lodge since the fatal
      night in Denzil Lane</p>
<p>They were still at Nice, when Rupert one afternoon, being too fatigued to go out on the
      beach, stayed in to write a letter or two, and was resting by the open window. It was a lovely
      winter's day, the sea tranquil, and the lights subdued and pensive, while the air came in warm
      gusts through the casement, which was completely framed in leaves. Glanville felt very weak;
      his mind, too, was distracted, he could not tell why. The letter he was writing would not get
      itself finished. He let his pen drop, took up a paper-knife, and began to make imaginary
      drawings on the desk. While he was playing idly with it, and the confused memories of the last
      three years were passing through his brain, a thought struck him, and he looked attentively at
      the desk, almost as though it were a living thing which could tell him what he wanted. 'Why do
      I carry this always with me? he asked himself; 'I know there must be a reason. Did it belong
      to any one?' He could not recollect. But he turned it to and fro, opened the compartments,
      unlocked some secret drawers, and poured out their contents on the
      <pb n="221"/> table. They made a miscellaneous heap. 'Looking for letters,' he said musingly;
      'who was it that turned over a great pile of correspondence, looking for letters? I was
      standing by. And there was only a candle burning. At night it was, surely. I wish I could
      remember.' He passed his hand through the papers; it struck against a bundle of them, which he
      drew out—a small packet tied carefully with riband. He undid it, and a number of letters fell
      on the table. At the sight of that handwriting, which he did not know, which he could not
      assign to the writer, a fit of trembling came over him. He sat down, and for some time would
      not look again. Then with an effort he turned to the signature. There was none, all the
      letters were unsigned. But there was a heading to each of them, and it breathed the tenderest
      affection; and as he passed from one to the other, astonished, overcome, pierced through and
      through, the flood-gates of memory burst open. Tears gushed from his eyes; he laid his head,
      weeping, on the desk, and murmured in agony, 'Hippolyta.'</p>
<p>Little by little it came back, the sweet, dreadful, forgotten past. Holding her letters in
      his hand, putting them to his bosom like the anodyne that would still his beating heart,
      reading them in snatches and breaking off blinded with tears, he spent the next hour and the
      next piecing together his shattered life and endeavouring to make out his own story. Hippolyta
      was lost and he was married to Lady May. That was the sum. Fate had been too strong for
      <pb n="222"/> them. Three years—he could not reckon, even now, whether it was three years or
      how long it was —since the only woman he loved had forsaken him, and he was the husband of
      another! A cold sweat broke out on his forehead. He felt like a dying man. 'What if the fever
      should return, and I forget again!' he said, shuddering from head to foot. How strange to have
      forgotten Hippolyta! But she had been more cruel; she remembered and was gone away. Or could
      she be dead? Her father thought so; it was the last word he had spoken that night at
      Falside.</p>
<p>The sound of footsteps was heard on the gravel. May and her cousin, who had attended Lord
      Trelingham in his walk, were coming in. Rupert thrust back the letters into their
      hiding-place, and brushed past his wife at the door.</p>
<p>'Where are you going, dear?' she said, trying to detain him.</p>
<p>'For a walk,' was his answer; 'I shall not dine. Don't wait for me.' She was utterly
      astonished. Glanville, taking his hat, ran down the steps and away in the direction of the
      sea.</p>
<p>'Tom,' said Lady May to her cousin, 'something has happened. Rupert is not well. Follow him,
      please, and keep him in sight till he comes home again.'</p>
<p>The young man obeyed at once. He did not like the appearance of Rupert's eyes when he passed
      them. They were wild and dangerous. He moved on
      <pb n="223"/> quietly, and saw that the artist was taking hasty strides up and down the beach,
      his head sunk in deep meditation, his arms folded in front of him. To disturb him would have
      been imprudent; there was nothing for it but to keep out of sight and watch till darkness came
      on. When night fell Rupert was still pacing over the sands. Then Tom went up to him, and with
      gentle decision took him by the arm and led him home. Glanville did not resist; he went in and
      shut himself in his room. Lady May found him lying on the bed asleep. She sat there a long
      time, afraid to wake him; but when he came to himself again he reprimanded her tenderly for
      letting him lie, dressed as he was, so many hours. 'Are you better?' she inquired, bending
      over him.</p>
<p>'As well as I ever shall be,' he replied in a tone of utter sadness. And that was all the
      explanation he would give of the fatal afternoon.</p>
<p>He left her now frequently and took solitary expeditions on foot, in which he would allow
      none to join him. Tom Davenant was not fitted to play the spy; he felt that Rupert, though ill
      and feverish, was capable of resenting surveillance, which indeed, after the first outbreak,
      he did not seem to need. Lady May consulted the Earl's physician privately. He recommended
      that as little notice as possible should be taken, but a person set to watch Glanville when he
      went abroad. it was done, and nothing came of it. The artist merely went by the sea, or sat in
      a sheltered nook when he had got some distance from
      <pb n="224"/> home. He appeared to be reading papers occasionally; he met no one and did
      himself no harm. The surveillance was given up, and Lady May, on her father's advice, urged
      their journey to Spain. Perhaps change of air was all Rupert required.</p>
<p>He required much more, but she could not have imagined it. During the next months there went
      on a desperate struggle between his restored memory, bringing him daily anguish, and the
      weakened reason which the brain fever had left him. To unburden himself of his secret might
      have been deliverance, but he could not speak, least of all to Lady May He said, 'I do not
      love her,' when he was away by the sea and Hippolyta's letters, with their naïve and
      intoxicating tenderness, were spread out before him. But he came home, and the letters were
      hidden again, and he felt pity for the deluded wife who had been faithful in everything. He
      knew the romance of the picture which had first made her acquainted with his name. She told
      him one day at Fiesole; he did not remember Hippolyta then, and he was grateful that this
      high-hearted Lady May had understood and cared for him. So now he pitied, he almost loved her;
      but it was not the great warm sunshine of love; it was a dreamy pale reflection, leaving him
      chill and her dissatisfied. For she could not tell what had come over Rupert. Was there an
      earlier affection? They came across Madame de Lutenieff in their travels. She was the same as
      ever, but she remarked a change in them. She had always been a
      <pb n="225"/> little sceptical of the artist's devotion to her cousin, though never, since the
      day when she refused Tom Davenant, of Lady May's attachment to him. With her old malicious
      lightness she sped a random arrow, as they were sitting at the late breakfast in the hotel at
      Burgos, where they were all staying. 'Have you heard of Miss Valence lately?' she said to
      Glanville, looking across at him.</p>
<p>He rose hastily, and thundering out, 'Never mention that name in my hearing, you witch,'
      left the room.</p>
<p>She was mortally offended, and said to Lady May, 'I knew it was not all fancy. Take care
      they never meet, or you will suffer the consequences.'</p>
<p>May, with equal anger, declared that it was a vile calumny. Rupert had been thrown from his
      horse near Falside, she went on, and the concussion of the brain which ensued had almost
      proved fatal; that was why he could not endure the associations of the place. Karina did not
      believe the story. She declined to pardon Rupert; and though it cost her a pang to leave Tom
      Davenant, her passion for whom was more absorbing than ever, she bad them good-bye next
      day.</p>
<p>Not sorry that she was gone, the others continued to travel southwards. They saw the curious
      old Spanish life that still lingers on the Mediterranean shore. They visited many a gloomy or
      graceful cathedral. They spent as many days as its depressing climate would allow in the
      golden air of Valencia,
      <pb n="226"/> and were fascinated with the limpid skies, exhilarating atmosphere, and gorgeous
      painted sunsets of Malaga. Thence they returned through some of the wildest and most
      picturesque country they had ever beheld,— green valleys, steep and rocky paths, and luxuriant
      vegetation, where the dark-green of the orange groves was mingled with the cane-brake,—by
      Velez and Alhama to the 'Last Sigh of the Moor,' and entering late, while the sun glittered on
      the snowy range aheadof them, beheld the enchanted Vega and Granada. It was three days' riding
      such as Tom Davenant had not enjoyed in his life; for he delighted in landscape, though he
      never spoke of it. The third day had been allowed for the sake of his cousin and her two
      invalids. Rupert, still fighting with madness, saw the beautiful things of their pilgrimage as
      in a dream. But the Sierra Nevada, with its glittering snows, made him lift his eyes to it.
      'Oh, that I had wings like a dove,' he murmured in the sweet familiar words, 'and I would fly
      and be at rest.' They had come through Barcelona, but he had prevailed on them not to explore
      what sights it possessed. He could not bear anything that reminded him of Hippolyta; the
      remembrance that she was born in this land of the sun made it melancholy to him. But he would
      have been sorry to leave it were the moment of departure at hand. Which this of our travellers
      was self-controlled enough to find due pleasure in the walks by Genil and Darro, in the
      endless unfolding dream of Alhambra and Alameda, with their thousand
      <pb n="227"/> reminiscences from a dead and gone time? Not Rupert. The green Vega, the
      rosy-tinted snows, the silence as of eternal mourning for a past that could never be restored,
      the pathos, the desolation,—these spoke to his heart, soothing it a little. They went on to
      Cordova, built by the Moslems in their ages of faith and high fortune, when their sword carved
      out empire and their chisel smoothed the marble blocks into symmetry, making of them
      sanctuaries wherein stood the golden-fretted inscription, 'There is no conqueror but Allah.'
      The artist-soul began to stir in Glanville. He felt a desire to sketch these Oriental-looking
      houses, to visit the great mosque under changing lights, to steal its colour from the Sierra
      for his canvas. But a very slight excursion with Tom Davenant in the vicinity—Tom pursuing the
      sport which abounds here, and Rupert loitering to fill his sketch-book—convinced him that he
      must lay aside the pencil again and fight his ghostly enemy with other weapons. He was too
      weak to paint.</p>
<p>The spring was not much advanced when they came to Seville, which they proposed to make
      their resting-place till the first heats should compel them to go on. The bright city, beloved
      of Moor and Christian, pleased them more than all they had seen. Situate in the midst of a
      watered garden, sheltered to north and south by a double parapet of hills, lit up with a clear
      sun which makes the air transparent like glass and brings out all delicate and fervent colour,
      with a gay and smiling population moving
      <pb n="228"/> in the shade of the narrow, winding streets, or basking in the warm sunshine, it
      might well have seemed a Paradise for the convalescent spirit, that could be cheered and
      strengthened only by surrendering itself to gentle influences. The nights were fresh; the air
      exhilarated like wine. For Rupert, the physician said, if he would not expose himself to the
      levante—the wind from the African deserts —there was no climate more suited. His prostration
      of spirits would cease; work would again be possible. Lady May devoutly hoped they should
      witness a change in him for the better ere they set out travelling again. The pictures, the
      glories of Murillo, the Herreras, and Zurbaran that made Seville a treasury, ought to rouse
      his enthusiasm, his emulation. Surely he would not renounce his splendid calling? And she
      quoted many of his sayings in the gallery at Trelingham,—how art itself, pursued in a spirit
      of truth, demanded and drew forth a heroism equal to the highest. He listened, he assented,
      but he was cold.</p>
<p>Yet there came refreshment to his weary spirit, though the star of hope had set never to
      rise again. He was glad to have lapsed, as it were, out of the busy modern life into a realm
      where all that was living belonged to the past, like a vision made palpable to the sense, but
      remaining a vision still. The memories of those London nights did not vex him so keenly. He
      strolled about alone, crossed the river frequently to explore Triana, the gipsy suburb,
      <pb n="229"/> and distract himself with the strange costumes, dilapidated, picturesque lanes,
      and odd-looking bits of colour which seemed quainter and more out of the world the more he
      studied them. His health improved. But with returning strength came a feeling of estrangement
      from Lady May that, conceal it as he might, would make its presence known by imperceptible
      channels. She was alarmed, indignant, at her wits' end. Could Rupert, so long after their
      marriage, be going back to the days when he cared nothing for her, when she dared not meet his
      eye? The thought was not to be endured. They had never indulged in lovers' quarrels; but they
      were sometimes near quarrelling now, and the atmosphere was charged with thunder. May
      Glanville was jealous. Of whom or what? Of a dead love, a memory, a regret? Suppose, after
      all, he had once cared for Hippolyta Valence, what did it signify? All men had such things in
      their lives. Was he not a devoted husband? 'Not as in those first happy months,' she answered
      with a sigh.</p>
<p>Tom Davenant was sorry that they had not stayed at Cordova, the country round which, with
      its pine forests and wild-wooded hollows, he preferred to the environs of Seville. But coming
      in after a long day's rambling, he upbraided his friends at dinner for not having paid a visit
      which, he supposed, they would have undertaken at the earliest opportunity. 'In what
      direction?' Lady May inquired. 'Wasn't that picture in the gallery at Trelingham brought
      <pb n="230"/> from a place, a convent or church, in these parts?' he asked in turn. 'From the
      convent of San Lucar,' replied his cousin, 'and the nearest town was Sepúlveda,'—'Quite so,'
      said Tom; 'I heard you mention the name often enough; and I fixed it in my mind by calling it
      Sepulchre, which it sounds like.'— 'It is the name of a poet,' interposed Rupert, 'a native of
      Cordova, I think, whose ballads are sometimes pretty.'—'Well, I got within sight of it
      to-day,' said Tom, 'and I thought it looked as gloomy as any place I ever saw. But the country
      all about is fine. Why don't you make an expedition to the convent? You could get there by
      driving in three days at the outside.'</p>
<p>'It would be an agreeable diversion,' said the Earl. 'Do you suppose we could put up at
      Sepúlveda?'</p>
<p>'I will tell you the best way,' answered Tom. 'I came round on Sepúlveda—what a name!—by
      cross-roads, and I saw the convent, standing out very clear on one side of the valley, and a
      large white house, which I took to be a sort of <hi>paseo</hi> , if it was not an inn, on the
      other. Let us look in the guide-book. An inn at that spot would be exactly what you want. You
      could sleep the night there, go over your convent next morning, and come back when you
      pleased.'</p>
<p>The guide-book when produced gave little information. There was an inn where Tom Davenant
      had seen one, not of the very best, but fairly good. In Sepúlveda there was none to be
      recommended. Of
      <pb n="231"/> the convent only this brief notice was given, that it once held the shrine of a
      local saint, and had shared in the general suppression. After considerable debate it was
      resolved that they should set out in two days, and Tom should precede them to make all
      ready.</p>
<p>At this point in my story I may as well remark that not long before the Duke of Adullam had
      despatched a peremptory message to Ivor Mardol, who was working as usual in his own home in
      Grafton Place. The laconic epistle forbade delay; a carriage was waiting which conveyed Ivor
      to the Duke's residence, and in a few minutes they were seated with closed doors in his
      library. The conference lasted some time. When Ivor came out again his face had the strangest
      expression, and bore traces of violent weeping. He returned home in the carriage that brought
      him, sent word to his newspaper that they must find some one to take his place and consider
      his engagement at an end, put some few things together in the greatest agitation, and started
      for Paris by the night mail. This observed we may return to our friends at Seville.</p>
<p>They set forth in brilliant weather; and difficult as are Spanish roads, and ill-tempered as
      were the Spanish beasts that carried them sullenly along, it was not possible to resist the
      sweet influence of air and sun, the genial morning, and the prospects, which grew lovelier as
      they advanced. Rupert, mindful of the purpose they were fulfilling, and the associations
      <pb n="232"/> which must be vividly present to Lady May and her father, exerted himself to
      bear a worthy part, and by assiduous and delicate attentions all but effaced from his own mind
      the feeling of estrangement which had ruled there during the past weeks. It was natural to
      touch on the Madonna of the Seraphim and its wonderful history; but they diverged thence to
      speak of a thousand things which were but distantly connected with Madonnas or with painting.
      The charm of Glanville's conversation, long suppressed by illness, and his anxious inward
      conflicts, seemed greater than ever. Lord Trelingham listened in a pleasant mood, and his
      daughter's eyes sparkled with delight. She did not venture to express her feelings, lest
      Rupert, become self-conscious, should fall back into his tone of reserve; but he saw that she
      was happy and it took away the sting of remorse. He knew his conduct for some time had been
      unjustifiable; he could not excuse or explain it. However, he would strive against the
      tempter. During these days he would not think of Hippolyta. While saying so to himself he let
      fall the conversation; he was thinking of her already, and the lovely face came to trouble and
      perplex him. Still, he made the effort; he found subjects which would lead them away from the
      Hermitage and Falside. If at eventide he seemed worn out Lady May did not suspect the
      reason.</p>
<p>Their journey during these two days took them by many a desert place and wild, where not a
      tree grew
      <pb n="233"/> nor a house was to be seen, and only the lentisk and the coarsest grass would
      flourish. Irrigation failing, much of the garden of Andalusia has become a wilderness; the
      country people have retired in the train of effeminate dukes and marquises to the towns; and
      often when the gates are passed the traveller might fancy himself in the wastes of Africa. But
      overhead was the steadfast blue sky, and on the edge of the landscape rose that semicircle of
      lofty heights which Colonel Valence had long ago in his letter compared to the drop-scene of a
      theatre. The snow lay on them in great sparkling fields, which sometimes had the softness of
      clouds, and changed colour as the sun passed over them. Rupert spoke little this second day,
      but he did not seem ill at ease.</p>
<p>A wearisome drag up the side of the wind-swept, long-drawn ascent brought them at close of
      day to Sepúlveda, which, huddling on the brow and straggling over the sides of its mountain,
      appeared dark and grim as they drove through its unpaved streets and solitary Plaza. 'I am
      glad we are not staying here,' said Lady May. They came out on the other side as the bells of
      San Lucar were ringing the Angelus. For a while they paused. The narrow valley with the
      country beyond lay at their feet, the glory of sunset streaming over it. To their left, at no
      great distance, rose the gray-white walls of the convent, its imposing church seeming to stand
      in front of the other buildings, as though to protect and sanctify them. The windows
      glittered, and below them, but
      <pb n="234"/> not far down, the waters of the Guadalete, broadened to a lake, shone like a
      blazing mirror beneath the rays of the sun, which was now on the verge of the mountains, a
      fiery, golden ball. The white roads ran by the convent, through garden after garden, vineyard
      after vineyard; and near and far the cornfields grew lusty and green, while feathered
      palm-trees rising close to San Lucar gave an Oriental charm to the landscape, and reminded our
      pilgrims that they had come to an Arabian land. There was something Moorish and fairylike over
      it all. They considered the way they were going. On the right Lady May pointed out to her
      father, whose eyes were weak, the track which led to their inn—a large white-washed building,
      with the air of a deserted barracks, standing high over against the convent. For on that side
      the ravine was steep and much more elevated than San Lucar, serving to screen the house from
      the north-east wind. Small white cottages, or rather huts, were visible, looking like tiny
      sailing-boats, among the vineyards; and on the river side a fisherman here and there was
      drying his nets. Otherwise not a human being was anywhere in sight. The stillness, the absence
      of breathing life, added a mournful charm. 'The landscape has fallen asleep,' said Rupert.</p>
<p>Very slowly, for their beasts were tired, they made the circuit of the road, now up, now
      down, until they arrived at La Fonda d'Oro. Tom Davenant met them on the way. He had made
      everything
      <pb n="235"/> as comfortable as might be. The host, a travelled and well-educated Andalusian,
      full of kindness and courtesy, received them with much warmth, addressing them in a few words
      of very broken English to show that he knew their national habits. He was a Liberal, had lived
      some months an exile in London, and would probably join in the next pronunciamento on behalf
      of the Republic. But happily he could not talk politics with Lord Trelingham, whose mastery
      over foreign languages had never been great. The rooms were large and cool, with little
      furniture and unpapered walls, but the most extensive views over the valley and beyond. There
      were no other guests. Tom Davenant had caught some trout in the river below, their wine they
      had brought from Seville, and when dinner was served in the immense dining-room, whose windows
      seemed to join the sheet of silver water outside, they were feeling more intimate and at home
      with one another than had been their fortune since Rupert's memory was restored to him.</p>
<p>They resolved on spending the morrow in going over church and convent. The host, in reply to
      their inquiries, said they had better cross in the boat. It was shorter than going back to the
      bridge near Sepúlveda. But there was nothing to see, in his opinion. The church had lost its
      treasures; the convent, he added between his teeth, had been given by the clericals who now
      ruled Spain to some fresh order of nuns, he could not say whether black, white, or gray,—they
      were nuns, that was enough,—who
      <pb n="236"/> had got it through the Queen's confessor three or four years ago. They were not
      the old set, he knew, but they were nuns.</p>
<p>Lady May, who followed his Spanish more easily than the others, interpreted to her husband,
      hoping it would amuse him. The Earl retired, and Tom Davenant went to make friends with the
      ostlers, including the zagal or boy who had run with the horses from Seville, and to smoke
      endless <hi>puros</hi> in true Spanish fashion, to the increase of their good fellowship—for
      he gave away as many as he smoked.</p>
<p>Rupert and his wife, when they went upstairs, were drawn to the window by the splendid
      moonlight which flooded the valley. They stood a long while looking out, in silence. The palms
      rose dark against the sky; vineyards and cornfields had put off their bright green. The lake
      was a sheet of silver, on which the reeds, trembling as the wind took them, cast wavering
      shadows. San Lucar, with its many roofs and massive sanctuary, was wrapt in slumber, and the
      moonbeams glorified it like a pavilion whose curtains were drawn, and its inhabitants
      spellbound, as in the thousand and one nights of Scheherezade. The stillness was deeper, if
      possible, than in the day. Leaning her head on Rupert's shoulder, the lady said at last, 'This
      makes you happy, does it not, my artist?'—'Happy?' he replied. 'Ah yes, but not for to-morrow.
      Life's a dream.'</p>
<pb/>
</div>