
CHAPTER XIII SWEETEST EYES WERE EVER SEEN
When Rupert left the picture-gallery he descended behind Trelingham Court into the
      Park, and, after walking some distance, struck into a little-frequented pathway, bordered with
      evergreens, which led in the opposite direction to the moor and came down finally to the river
      Yale. Sunshine, still lingering about and penetrating through the branches, made a chequered
      pattern before him as he walked; the foliage stirred under a light inconstant breeze, the
      sound of the sea broke upon his ear when he paused; and he felt that he might now, without
      offending conscience, take a holiday. He had been working hard with brain and pencil for
      several weeks. He had thought and dreamt of nothing but the picture. It was at length
      finished. He could stretch out his arms like a man who has had the fetters taken off them. He
      was free, and the great work would do him honour. Mind and brain were now
       at rest; he might wander as he pleased and forget yesterday to make himself the
      readier for to-morrow. A chapter of his life was closed.
That sense of finality, of complete severance from the past, which comes on the conclusion
      of an undertaking in which we have long been interested predominated over all others. He saw
      the curtain fall on the dramatic morning-piece which might have been styled A Lady's
       Portrait . All that he had done, all that was associated with the Madonna of San Lucar,
      receded to a distance; it became as fixed and cloudlike as the ridge of mountains we may see
      every day from our window but never think of travelling towards. And the figure of Lady May
      receded, floated on, and became a reminiscence affecting him no more than the painted Madonna
      herself. Had he been in love? He smiled. Was there love in a fancy which could not endure a
      change of conditions, which fled with the crowd of momentary shadows that swept by him and
      left no trace? What he felt now was a sunny satisfaction, restoring him to his former sense of
      freedom. The mesmeric trance into which he had fallen was at an end. He could go whither he
      chose, and take with him neither regret nor longing. Rupert felt that he had ceased to be his
      own master for a little interval; but the servitude could not last. He was delighted to be
      free; and with a light step he strolled on till he came to the river.
At the place where he paused the Yale was
       moving over sand and jutting stones, which broke the tiny stream into a hundred
      glittering rivulets, and gave a sure footing if one were tempted to cross. The other side,
      thickly covered with tall trees, looked pleasant in the sunshine and not hard to climb. It
      seemed to lead upwards to open country, to a view over the moor which Glanville had not
      enjoyed. He stood a moment considering, then sprang lightly from stone to stone, and began to
      ascend the steep. It proved more difficult than he had fancied; the ground was broken, the
      brushwood grew at the most irregular intervals and made his advance fatiguing. But there was a
      zigzag path, wide enough for one, which led along the side of the valley and might take him to
      the top. His thoughts were agreeable; the morning had many hours in it yet, and why should he
      not ramble on? He went forward, plucking a leaf here and there, or breaking off a withered
      branch; stopped sometimes to get a glimpse of the river where it was flowing beneath him, and
      fell into a poetic reverie which brushed with passing wing a thousand associations, old and
      new, but was not awake enough to dwell upon any of them.
He had been advancing for nearly an hour, and still the track did not turn, but ran
      irregularly on, as if meaning to come out at the end of the ridge. On his right, which was the
      way he wanted to go, the steep grew higher and more rugged; the trees huddled close together,
      and walking became no easy task. Should he retrace his steps?

He went a few paces forward. There was a flicker of sunshine among the leaves and a bit of
      blue sky showing itself ahead; perhaps there might be an opening where he saw it. The wood
      seemed to grow thicker than ever, but he scrambled through, and found himself in a narrow,
      tortuous bridle-path which descended from the high country, and, skirting the impenetrable
      side of the thicket, wound away in the direction towards which Glanville had set his face. He
      remembered the map of the region, and judged that it must be making for Toxenden. He had no
      wish to get so far. Looking again, he saw that a grassy opening stretched down towards the
      river, and he determined on exploring that way. He disliked going back on his own footsteps,
      but did not mind an hour's extra walking in search of adventures—pedestrian adventures, ending
      in muddy boots, which was all he could hope for in civilised England. He went over the grass
      and found that the opening continued. It was not long before he saw the gleaming of water to
      his left; but, instead of a sparkling thread, it seemed a broad sheet. He broke through the
      covert, and in surprise looked down upon 'the shining levels of the lake.' In front rose the
      smiling Hermitage. He had come to it by a pathway which was hardly used, and which had never
      before been traversed by him.
Although the sun was not so warm nor the sky so bright as when for the first time he beheld
      the chalet, it was an exquisite morning, and he stood awhile to
       contemplate the picture. Doors and windows were open as then, inviting him to
      enter. He did not suppose Ivor would be there; for he never lunched at the Hermitage when he
      had gone up early to Trelingham Court. But Rupert said to himself that he might as well take
      possession of the Pompeian kitchen and improvise a classic, though a lonely meal, before
      ending his expedition. He should find a skiff in the boat-house. He opened the door and looked
      round, expecting to see what he wanted; but, if a rowing-boat had ever been there, it was
      gone. He found instead—and it made him laugh when he saw it—one of those odd-looking
      contrivances which represent the first untutored efforts of man at ship building, which are
      less advanced even than a canoe. They are round, tub-like things, made of wood and leather,
      roughly put together, and I fancy are called coracles. The instrument by which they are put in
      motion is a short-handled spoon, of a good breadth at the extremity; and they move along with
      great speed when a savage or a knowing University man takes the command. 'Well,' said
      Glanville, 'here is proof positive that the prehistoric has been in the land, or, to speak
      more accurately, on the water. I must really try my hand at this.' He sat himself down in the
      coracle, and with that mixture of courage and wariness that we may observe in genuine
      athletes, so manipulated the large flat spoon that he was neither upset nor sent whirling
      round in a hopeless circle. As he sped along, much engrossed in the government
       of his coracle, he looked forward, and, not without surprise, perceived that the
      proper civilised boat was lying at the bottom of the steps which led up to the Hermitage.
      'Then Ivor is at home, after all,' he said to himself; 'but why did he come round to this
      side? Has he been exploring in the wood like me? And if he has, why did I not hear or see
      him?'
He fastened the coracle, sprang out, and ran up the steps, calling out as he entered, 'Ivor,
      Ivor!' There was no response. Thinking he might be in the kitchen, Rupert went thither; but no
      Ivor was there. What could have become of him? He turned back and noticed that the door of the
      study by which he had passed was half-open. His friend might be engaged over some drawing and
      too busy to answer. Throwing the door wide, he would have called out again as he entered, but
      that a sight most unexpected made him pause, draw back, and become fixed, motionless as a
      statue, on the threshold. A young lady in a riding habit, a lady he had never set eyes on, an
      angel that must have dropped from the third heaven, stood with a book in her hand quietly
      confronting him. Not a word did she utter, and confusion held him dumb. Politeness deserting
      him in his utmost need, he gazed for half a minute —or was it for half an eternity?—into the
      calm, lustrous eyes that met his own. They seemed of a most limpid innocence—beautiful,
      shining, starlike. Did the lady look as steadily at him? I am sure
       he did not know. All he saw were the beautiful eyes, not any of the meaning they
      may have had in them. He waited spellbound.
The lady did not blush, or seem greatly taken aback. She smiled the least bit in the
      world—innocently, yet not harmlessly. And then, in a low clear voice, still keeping her book
      in her hand, still fascinating the thrice-bewildered Rupert with her childlike eyes, she said,
      'Are you the tenant of the chalet? And must I ask your pardon?'
'The tenant? No; really I—my friend Mr. Mardol—I was expecting to find him; is there
      any—'
Rupert stopped. He did not know how to go on; his eyes made his tongue falter. I think the
      young lady knew, suspected, was at least half-conscious that he could not continue while she
      kept looking at him. She turned slightly away, and took up his broken discourse.
'Then,' she said, 'you do not live here. I was afraid'—she did not look in any way afraid,
      and I cannot believe she was, although she said so—'I was afraid it might be like the fairy
      tale, and that one of the bears was coming home.'
'The bears—the fairy tale? I do not understand you.' He was bewildered yet. She laughed now,
      and looked prettier than before. 'If you are a stranger,' she said, 'and not master of the
      chalet, you will allow me to take my leave before any one comes. You appear not to know a
      great deal about
       fairy tales,' she went on, as if enjoying his perplexity; 'but I have no time to
      explain. I ought to go before the bears catch me. There is no saying whether they would take
      me for their sister. Some of them ought,' she added pensively.
'If you mean,' answered Rupert, who began to remember the children's story to which she
      alluded, 'that you do not wish to meet any of Lord Trelingham's family, I think I can assure
      you that they are not likely to visit the Hermitage at this hour. It is my friend, Mr. Ivor
      Mardol, who lives here just now.'
Her gloves were lying on a chair. She put down the volume in her hand, took up the gloves,
      and began slowly to put them on. After some deliberation, she said:
'And is your friend a relative of Lord Trelingham's?'
'Not at all,' answered Rupert; 'he is an artist, like myself, who happens to be staying
      here.'
'And who is painting Lady May's portrait, I suppose.' She spoke like one to whom the name of
      Lady May was familiar.
'No,' said he, wondering who the lady was; ' I am painting the portrait. I should
      rather use the past tense, for it is finished.'
'Then you are Mr. Glanville, the other artist,' she replied; 'I heard my father speak of
      you. But I did not know there were two artists at Trelingham.'
Rupert wondered still more. 'Mr. Mardol,' he
       said, 'is more properly an engraver, not an artist. But may I inquire who it was
      that spoke of me?'
'My father,' she repeated, 'Colonel Valence. Did you not meet him in Trelingham churchyard
      the afternoon of the great storm? He told me that you had had some conversation in the porch
      while it thundered and lightened. He mentioned your name several times before he went
      away.'
This was like opening a flood-gate. The notion that he was talking with Colonel Valence's
      daughter awakened a whole train of questions in Rupert's mind. He forgot that the lady was
      standing in the Hermitage, where apparently she had no business to be, and that he himself was
      a stranger to her.
'Has Colonel Valence gone?' he cried. 'I should have liked—I was hoping to meet him again.
      Our conversation was so extraordinary that I did not know what to make of it, and it has
      puzzled me ever since. But I beg your pardon, Miss Valence. It is impertinent of me to say all
      this.'
'Why, no,' she answered; 'not if I could tell you what my father meant, as I daresay would
      not be impossible. He shares his thoughts with me.'
'Shares his thoughts with her!' said Glanvile to himself; 'how many of his thoughts, I
      wonder?' He mentally compared the scarred and saturnine face of the old man with the beautiful
      open countenance of his daughter. She did not seem made for a philosophy in which the last
      word was universal shipwreck.

'Some of Colonel Valence's thoughts are very stern,' he said aloud.
'Too stern, indeed,'answered the young lady with a sigh. 'I wish some one would convert him
      to a gentler mood. But we live utterly alone; and when he does mix with other human beings,
      they are men like himself, of earnest, daring temper. We pay a price for the new world that is
      coming.'
She spoke with calmness and decision, looking as childlike now in her serious utterances as
      when she was alluding to the bears and the fairy tale.
'Do you hold that a new world is coming?' he asked, with some astonishment in his tone,
      which Miss Valence's ear detected. 'A new world?'
'Surely I do,' she answered. 'Are not the signs of it everywhere? I should have imagined,
      since you are an artist, that you would be one of the first to think so, too. Have you no
      share in the "prophetic soul of the wide world, dreaming on things to come"? My father calls
      the true artist a seer of the ideal which in other men lies dormant. He is enthusiastic about
      art, especially painting. It is the only enjoyment he has.'
Rupert was struck with a sudden thought. 'Has Colonel Valence heard that I have been engaged
      on Lady May's portrait?' he inquired. It occurred to him that Colonel Valence would wish to be
      informed of the accident to his Madonna. And what if he would, Rupert? do you think
       that a sufficient excuse for renewing your acquaintance with him, or
       for combating his philosophy, and looking at your ease on the countenance of
      this young lady while you do so? Oh no; it was nothing so hypocritical. Of course not. But if
      the Colonel had endured such hardships to bring the picture from Spain, it would be only
      charitable to tell him about it. In the last few moments he had become more amiable in
      Glanville's eyes.
'I do not think he has,' she replied. 'The day after the storm he went to London. He will
      not return for a long while. He stays very little at Falside now.'
'Is Falside your home?' Rupert did not reflect how he was violating all the proprieties. How
      dared he be so inquisitive? I wonder Miss Valence was not offended. But she seemed not to
      mind. Instead of at once insisting on being taken to her boat, she answered:
'My father was born at Falside, and we have lived there since my mother's death.'
'Oh, since Lady Alice's death?' exclaimed Rupert, completely off his guard. 'But is not that
      a great while ago?'
'Lady Alice was not my mother,' she answered quietly; 'she was my father's first wife.'
'And she lies in Trelingham churchyard,' said Glanville. 'Was that why Colonel Valence came
      out on that bitter afternoon?'
'Yes,' she replied; 'he spends many afternoons there. But do you know the story of Lady
      Alice?' she went on.

'I happen,' he said, 'to have heard the beginning of it. That is all. I know the romantic
      circumstances under which Lady Alice left her home and married. But I know no more; the thread
      of the story has not been resumed.'
'There is little more to know,' she answered. 'Lady Alice died in London, after eleven or
      twelve years of married life. Then my father went abroad. You perhaps have heard that he was
      engaged in the campaigns against Don Carlos, and received his commission in Spain. He has
      never been in the English army. He was a soldier of liberty, not the defender of a state or a
      sovereign.'
'And did Lady Alice leave no children?'
'No; I have neither brother nor sister. That is why it would be so pleasant to find a sister
      in Lady May. We are not relatives, of course, and she is a good deal older than I. But when I
      see her driving near Falside, as she sometimes does, or wandering down by the shore, I am
      often tempted to speak to her and beg her friendship.'
Glanville thought, while she spoke, what a striking contrast they would make. Lady May,
      although not taller than the average, had a stateliness of manner which seemed to add to her
      height; she was dark and almost foreign-looking with her great piercing eyes, long eyelashes,
      and, as the poets say in describing this type of beauty, her ebon tresses, that naturally
      suggested a crown or a chaplet of purple flowers to set them off. She moved slowly, and had
       nothing of the tripping fairy in her motions. The expression of her countenance
      was earnest and impassioned. And what was Colonel Valence's daughter like? Rupert found it
      necessary to study her features with great attention; he might be asked some day to paint her
      portrait; or what if he sketched it from memory when he went home, and laid it up in his
      portfolio? There could be no harm in doing that. He wondered, by the way, what her name was.
      How could he find out without appearing over-curious? Hers was a slender form, graceful as
      Arethusa's, or the mountain-nymph's whose home is among rocks and streams, where all day long
      she roams, climbing, or springing, or dancing, as best pleases her, seldom quiet except when
      she has tired herself out with play. Her countenance was clear and well-cut, of that exquisite
      pale olive which is the least English of tones, resembling fine ivory. And those innocent
      brown eyes, how softly they gazed at the audacious painter! how tender and steadfast was their
      expression! They had caught a golden-tawny hue from the ringlets of sunny hair falling about
      her face, among which the breeze coming in at the open window played wantonly. Such a
      combination of light and dark in the human countenance he had never beheld. The exquisite
      shape might be matched, perhaps, did he know where to look for it, in sylph or fairy. But
      could sylph or fairy boast of that serious, calm, aerial loveliness which shone out, so young
      and so unconscious, from the pale ivory
       features and the soft eyes? Not knowing what had been said or what he was
      saying, Rupert drew a step nearer, and in a beseeching voice, as if he must fall on his knee
      and worship whilst he spoke, the words came from his lips in a half-whisper, 'Would you tell
      me—nay, be angry if you will, but tell me—what, by what name may I remember you?'
The lady blushed almost scarlet now. Her pale cheek showed a deep, passionate tinge, and
      even her forehead was dyed in a faint rose-colour, which grew purple as she answered:
'Sir! how dare you?' She had got no further when she saw Rupert at her feet.
'Oh, forgive me,' he said; 'I could not—I did not know what I was saying. For the world I
      would not offend you.'
There was something in his tone which melted her. No, he had not meant to offend; he was
      only overcome, fascinated, out of himself. How is it that love reveals its presence? She could
      not speak for a moment; and her voice when it came back was, like Rupert's, almost
      inarticulate. 'Rise,' she said; 'do not kneel there.'
And as he stood before her, ashamed, penitent, his eyes seeking the ground, she went on, not
      looking at him—'My name is Hippolyta.'
'Ah,' he said, laughing passionately, 'I knew you came out of A Midsummer Night's
       Dream . Titania should be jealous of you.'
'Again, sir!' she cried, going to the door; 'stand
       aside and let me pass.' She would not even look at him. It was all he could do
      not to fall at her feet again.
'Not like that,' he exclaimed. 'Oh, not like that. What shall I do if you go away despising
      me? I am mad; I have lost my senses. But I will not, I will not offend any more.' She had
      reached the verandah. He followed, ran down the steps and began to unfasten the boat.
While they were speaking it had grown stormy on the lake; there was a strong backwater
      driven by the rising wind, and the waves, though not large, seemed dangerous for a light
      skiff, such as Hippolyta had come in. she did not appear to notice the weather; her face was
      still flushed and her eyes bright with tears. Rupert could have bitten his tongue off when he
      thought of the liberty he had taken. He felt more than ashamed—he was humiliated. A gentleman,
      he, Rupert Glanville, to have behaved so, to have spoken such words! He turned with a
      deprecating look towards Hippolyta as she came slowly down the steps. She could not pass him.
      She stopped.
'Miss Valence,' he said humbly, 'this small boat is not safe in such stormy weather. Will
      you allow me to fetch the larger one, which is lying in the boathouse opposite, and to row you
      to shore?'
'I will allow nothing,' she answered; 'I did wrong to come here. Let me pass into the
      boat.'
Glanville saw that the storm would be upon them
       ere long. He said, firmly this time, like a man who is doing what he knows to be
      right, 'I cannot let you risk your life, Miss Valence. If you will not wait till I can bring
      the safer boat you must allow me to take charge of this. A very few minutes will see you on
      shore.'
Reluctantly Hippolyta consented. When there is danger and a man commands, a woman does not
      find it easy to disobey. She entered the boat and sat down, while Rupert took the oars. Not a
      word more was spoken. Hippolyta looked over the side of the skiff, away in the distance, as if
      no Rupert existed. It was all she could do to keep the tears from falling. A sharp sense of
      pain, almost of degradation, filled her heart. Perhaps there was another feeling too, which
      she knew little about, although it gave an edge to the pain. She sprang out as soon as the
      boat touched. But before she could quite flee away, Rupert was at her side, bareheaded.
'I beg your pardon,' he said in a low voice. His head was bent. She saw that he was biting
      his under lip to keep down some strong emotion. His breath went and came. But she would not
      pity him. Half sobbing, with tremulous indignation, breaking her sentences into short phrases,
      she said, turning to the abashed and guilty artist:
'I came out of childish curiosity, and—and I have been punished. Tell Lord Trelingham, if
      you please, that I wanted to see the chalet, that I did not know—and I had never seen it, and
      my father said ... but it does not matter.'

Her voice broke down. She was fairly crying now. Rupert did not dare to come near her; he
      could not leave her in distress; he knew not which way to look. Oh, what a villain he had
      been! But he must speak.
'I would give my life that this had not happened,' he cried. 'Miss Valence, I implore you,
      think no more of it. Indeed, indeed, I meant no harm. I was beside myself. Cannot you forgive
      one who has never seen—' he stopped, he was near committing himself again. Hippolyta listened,
      like a child that leaves off crying when it hears a well-known voice. She could control
      herself better now, and Rupert was very sorry. He had really been carried away by a sudden
      impulse. She resolved not to forgive him, all the same. One more glance she gave at the artist
      as he stood, like a culprit or a penitent, speechless in the presence of his offended goddess.
      And then she ran up the ascent till she was out of breath and compelled to rest against a
      tree.
Glanville lifted his face when he saw her depart, and looked, and looked, all turned to
      gazing, until she disappeared amid the thick undergrowth. Then, as if wings had been added to
      his feet, and he were Apollo that had borrowed the sandals of Hermes in pursuit of Daphne, the
      young man followed, not knowing why he did so, unless it were that another moment of the
      intoxicating vision seemed well worth flying after. Hippolyta had run fast but not far. On the
      soft grass she heard no steps, and when Rupert
       came in sight of her again he beheld the gentle Amazon unfastening her
      palfrey—call it not, I beseech you, either cob or pony—which was receiving his mistress with
      manifestations of joy as she came up to the place where he was tethered. Rupert, gliding
      behind the friendly covert of the trees, watched her every movement. She was excited and out
      of breath, but evidently not much frightened. From time to time as she stopped to put her
      handkerchief to her eyes a pang shot through Rupert's heart. Yes, she was crying still, poor
      Hippolyta; and this rude swain did not dare to show that he was anywhere at hand, still less
      could he venture on addressing her with more apologies. What would he not have given to help
      her to her saddle! He had lost the grace that might have been his for a foolish word. Oh, wild
      human heart and hasty tongue, can nothing put a check upon you? Hippolyta patted her steed,
      which was a small dark roan, with beautifully-shaped intelligent head,—I do not quite know how
      veterinary persons would describe what I mean, but the whole head, and not the eyes or
      nostrils only, looked intelligent, instinct with a higher life than good feeding and grooming
      could bring out. But neither were these neglected, as the glossy sleekness of the creature
      testified. Hippolyta, I say, patted his beautiful head, and, being utterly unaware that there
      was a spectator of her actions, put an arm round his neck and kissed him on the forehead.
      Rupert bit his lip again. Young man, that is your punishment for spying and
       gazing where you ought not to be! Hippolyta vaulted into the saddle with the
      lightness of a bird, gave the reins a shake, and was off like an arrow. Hermes's sandals were
      now of no avail. Rupert saw that she was taking the road which led up stream, and, as he
      supposed, to Falside. Oh, that he might follow!
He did not move from the spot where he beheld her vanish until many minutes were passed.
      Then, like a man waking from a heavy dream, he shook himself, looked round, and remembering
      that he had left the boat unmoored, went with slow meditative steps down the glade. How many
      hours were gone since his feet had trodden it first that morning? He could not tell. Reckoned
      by emotions it might be a century or two. He forgot even luncheon; and, instead of returning
      like a sensible mortal to the Hermitage where good things were to be had for the cooking, he
      simply fastened the skiff, which by a happy chance had drifted into some low tangle of
      branches and thus been kept from floating farther away. This done, Rupert ascended the glade
      for the second time, and finding a bleak and wild-looking country when he reached the top,
      plunged recklessly into it. He would have given half his genius, which was worth more than
      half the kingdom of many monarchs, to come within view of Falside. But the venture was too
      daring, and rather than yield to temptation he set off in the other direction.
It had begun to rain, and he had much better
       have returned to Trelingham instead of wandering on and on, not taking note of
      the way he was going, nor observing that the fine small drops, more like mist than wholesome
      rain, were wetting him through. His whole mind was absorbed in what had happened. Was it the
      one event of his life, the golden day for which he had been waiting since he knew the name of
      love, the unveiling of the face that in dreams he had beheld and longed after; or was it an
      irreparable mischance? 'Hippolyta, Hippolyta,' he murmured to himself. 'Oh, senseless Rupert,
      did you think the wedding could be without the wooing?' It was the most unmanly thing he had
      ever done. 'And yet,' he went on, 'she ought to have known that I meant only to worship her.'
      He smiled when the words, uttered half aloud, struck upon his ear. 'How could she have known
      what I meant? She had never set eyes on me. Are my looks so innocent as hers? Childlike,
      divine Hippolyta!' He fell into delicious, delirious musing. He must see her, speak to her
      again, win her pardon, protest that he would spend his life in atoning for the insolence of
      the morning. Yes, it was insolence. To ask her name! But she had answered; she told him it was
      Hippolyta. That could never be undone. The bond between them was of her making, after all. And
      she had spoken in a whisper, with what heavenly shame in her accent, as though resisting the
      suggestion which made her answer while yielding to it! Love, ah no, it was not love, but pity,
      modesty, the
       exquisite compassion of Hippolyta, who was a queen yet a child. In this way he
      babbled for hours—this great incontestable genius, walking at random and getting wet to the
      skin, and not minding, but with a heart all on flame, and love spreading out his golden
      pinions till the gray heavens seemed to melt and burn in their splendour. It was first love,
      the true deity and no counterfeit, whose wine, held out with coaxing gesture and half-smiling,
      half-frowning glance, intoxicated him when he put the cup to his lips. He rested now and then
      for a moment, stopping to enjoy the unmatchable emotion that had conquered him. But to keep
      still was impossible. He must go forward, and utter his feelings incoherently to himself as he
      went, smiling with a mixture of tenderness and scorn at the expressions that alone would come,
      the large, wild metaphors taken from all things in heaven and earth, the brief, sudden
      snatches of inebriation cutting short his speech altogether from time to time. He was not only
      a lover, but an artist whose intense fancy penetrated his nature through and through, being
      the fine spirit that made his genius what it was. He could not love as the common man loves;
      the passion he felt was individual, characteristic; it glowed with another fire than that
      which draws man and woman to have one heart in two bodies; for it aimed at a union of soul
      with soul, of all that was best in him with all that he imagined in Hippolyta. Do I say
      imagined? Well, be it so. But he would have rebuked the
       word. In that strange, lovely face, in those tender eyes, he saw the revelations
      of a personality as choice and adorable as they were. Could any spirit of clay inform such a
      tenement? Thus he would have argued. But while he wandered through the clinging mist, absorbed
      in the contemplation of Hippolyta, beholding her in memory with the vividness of intuition
      which a new love bestows, he was far indeed from argument of any kind. He was drinking deep at
      the fountain of perpetual youth; he was roaming through Eldorado; the world was a garden of
      roses, and he saw Hippolyta riding on her dark palfrey over mead and mossy glade, turning
      towards him as she fled and bidding him follow.
It is dangerous to be lost in thought, but even more dangerous to be lost on a trackless
      down; and this was what had now befallen Rupert. Without noticing that he had long since left
      the belt of trees which marked the high ridge he had ascended, by degrees he exchanged one
      path for another, until he was now actually travelling the opposite way to that which he
      intended. Soon there was no semblance of a track; he was on the heather, guided unconsciously
      by the figures of the great crags which loomed up through the mist when he came near them. But
      he did not stop to choose his direction. The tourist of the morning, bent on adventures, was
      likely to meet with one now; for he had become no better than a somnambulist, and might at any
      moment have plunged out of his depth into the
       boggy streams which rise on the moor and creep through the high grass with
      imperceptible motion. Fortunately, a strong breeze was blowing the mist aside; and the last
      short hour of the October day promised to be fair, and to be succeeded by a calm evening. As
      Rupert, somewhat exhausted with his violent emotions and headlong walk, was sitting on a huge
      boulder at the foot of the crag for which he had been making the last ten minutes, a final
      gust scattered the clouds right and left, the rain ceased, and a long lane of sunshine,
      forming in the space which the mist had left clear, took him up into its radiance. His face
      was towards the sun and his eyes were too dazzled to make out anything; but almost as the
      clouds rolled away he heard the galloping of a horse near at hand. He did not look up; the
      growing sense of fatigue had brought with it some depression; the wings of love were drooping,
      and he had begun to think more of the offence given than the return of affection he hoped for.
      But the sound of galloping came nearer; the horse stopped within a few paces of where he sat.
      And Hippolyta Valence, leaping to the ground, exclaimed in a troubled and astonished voice,
      'Mr. Glanville, are you here? What has happened to you?'

