
CHAPTER XII SPECIOSA MIRACULA
IVOR MARDOL has made such frank confession in the foregoing pages that I need not recount
      the history of those bewitching days when he proved himself less a contemplative than a common
      mortal. He had dreamt dreams and suffered moments of misery. Sometimes he had lingered an hour
      after breakfast about Rupert's easel and unwittingly performed the office of duenna, which the
      Countess had openly renounced, saying she was tired of sitting so long at the same window. Nor
      had he spent as many hours as were anticipated in his island-dwelling. There, as he bent over
      the canvas, he had been glad and sorry that it did not vex him with a lovely face; so
      distracted he could never have made it whole. But he had envied Rupert. And now? His eyes were
      purged of glamour, he saw that Lady May's indifference to him had been complete all along.
      She, a heroine of the old order, could not recognise a hero
       in this saint of the new. On hearing Glanville's description she had called Ivor
      romantic. She hardly thought him so after a month's acquaintance. His clear intellect,
      astounding erudition, frankness, and simplicity, made him as interesting as he was amiable.
      But to her the finest thing about him was his worship of Rupert. For she had not come to the
      stage of burning jealousy where even the friendship of a third person is resented. But things
      were going fast that way. The passion that consumed her was growing to a deadly white flame;
      and all beings, save herself and the artist, were becoming shadows and nonentities to her. How
      could she bestow a thought on Ivor?
He knew it now, and was resigned. His countenance did not betray him; and his Diary was a
      good, if a stern, friend in those long hours at the Hermitage. He found that he must not quit
      Trelingham. The Earl begged him to stay, and Rupert insisted. To their entreaties Tom Davenant
      joined his own. For, as if to demonstrate that not love but friendship must form his
      happiness, Ivor and the young heir of Trelingham had become the closest of companions. Tom,
      who was now himself again, had intended to return to Foxholme, but the Earl would not let him
      go. He persuaded him, in fact, to make the Court his home during the autumn and winter. There
      were deeds to be examined, accounts rendered, and other legal business transacted before his
      coming of age; and it would be pleasant to do
       these things at Trelingham rather than in London, which was a place Tom
      abhorred. He could never stay there above three days without losing his spirits; being most
      unlike his fashionable mother, who declared life in the country impossible. So the young man
      remained, and gave his time first to fishing and by and by to hunting, for he was fond of
      both. This, I fancy, is rare in the civilised sportsman; and, indeed, as they are habits
      derived from quite distinct sets of savage ancestors, they are not likely to be united in the
      same individual.
Now, Ivor was a follower of Isaac Walton's, and Tom Davenant, rowing one afternoon in August
      to the Hermitage for some fishing tackle he had left there, had found the philosopher equipped
      as for an expedition, and delightedly offered to show him the resources of the Yale. Ivor was
      already acquainted with them, but he submitted to be led up stream and down, while his guide
      pointed out the deep pools and shady nooks under sun-baked stones where the trout were
      lurking. They spent a delicious afternoon. The stream was whipped, the basket filled, and
      Ivor's knowledge of the ways of that pretty river excited Tom's highest admiration. Thus did
      the wild huntsman and the London engraver make friends. They did not say much about their
      feelings. But when Ivor was not in the house, Tom was pretty sure to be away; and many an hour
      they passed by lakelet and stream, during which their conversation ranged wider than might
      have been fancied. Ivor had not
       begun as a fisherman, he told Tom, but as an explorer. The sight of running
      water fascinated him, and he had spent his holidays in following the course of our English
      streams, going down with them through the varying landscape till they were lost in the sea. It
      was from lingering on the banks in all sorts of weather and studying the river life that he
      had come to understand the pleasure there was in angling. 'Cast a line into the waters,' he
      said,—and Tom listened as to inarticulate music,—'transform yourself for the while into pike
      or salmon, and forget your too busy reasoning, you will find after a few hours that all manner
      of dim faculties within are bestirring themselves, unsuspected kinships with the lower
      creation coming to light; you dream, and the spirit of the place floats silently near; it
      speaks in the only language that can be uttered in these depths, vague, elemental, soothing,
      and you recover a little of the freshness that made childhood a wonder and a romance.' Thus
      Ivor explained the final cause of fly-fishing; not to catch trout for supper, but to get back
      the lost sense of Paradise and be one again with the spirit of the watery realms from which,
      some forgotten morning millions of years ago, the first amphibian crept daringly on land. He
      said, now and then, to his scientific friends that while he agreed with them in going forward,
      he thought it would be fatal to man's happiness if he did not go backward too. In his
      metaphorical way he added, 'Though harvest means the golden grain which is waving in
       the sun, you will not get a second unless you bury the seed in the earth out of
      which it sprang. Go back to the amphibian if you would go on to the angel.' His friends looked
      gravely at him and did not smile. They thought it more respectable to say as little as might
      be of the amphibian now he had become such a distant relative. But these were
      chamber-philosophers, not students in the open air. They little understood what a revolution
      is preparing for their science, as well as for the political systems against which they are
      contending. 'Man will rule over Nature,' said Ivor, 'only when he is at home in every part of
      it and knows it from within.'
Thus Ivor gained a second friend, to whom, after Rupert, he cleaved with his whole heart.
      They had in common a deep sense of enjoyment and freedom in the open air, and the unconscious
      poetry that lingers about the sedges by the river. Perhaps there was something else that bound
      them—an innocent mind, a pure and simple heart; for they were both unworldly. Tom could
      understand where he could not speak, and he grew greatly attached to the stranger. He
      consulted him on other things besides fishing: what he ought to do at Foxholme, whether he
      could look after his tenants without doing more harm than good, and kindred subjects on which
      he would never have spoken to Lord Trelingham. Would Ivor come and stay with him after he was
      twenty-one? Ivor smiled, but made no promises. He was not his own master, he said.

Their intimacy delighted Glanville, surprised but did not displease the Earl, and slightly
      amused Lady May. In the bosom of the Countess it excited some innocent wonder. She neither
      liked nor disliked Mr. Mardol; to her he was a species of inferior artist, who came about the
      place as other men did to put up stained-glass or æsthetic woodwork. She wished he would not
      persuade Tom to go fishing so often, or spend the time after dinner out of doors. It was
      stupid when Tom came in merely to dine, and to stroll about afterwards with a male companion
      instead of staying to be worshipped in the drawing-room. For herself, she had made several
      flying visits to town, and meant, after Tom's birthday, to spend a season in Paris. But she
      could not forego the opportunities of seeing him which Trelingham afforded. It was her second
      home, and she would stay until the young man went. Thus eagles, wrens, and turtledoves reason,
      after their kind.
Glanville, meanwhile, was falling into a mesmeric sleep. He had no defence against the
      sorceries of Lady May, no other love to resist an ardent nature bent on making him its own. He
      felt the pressure of an invisible hand, silently but surely compelling him to his knees. He
      could not pretend indifference to Lady May. The strange fierce beauty of her character excited
      him. Her conversation was singularly animated; her voice had charmed him from the first; and
      the loneliness of her position appeared to him deserving of the sincerest pity. She spoke
       of the great relatives with whom she had passed her time during her mother's
      frequent illnesses. Among them all she had not one friend. Little by little she told Rupert
      all she dared. He saw more clearly than she did the peril of these confidential dialogues. But
      it was hard not to return her confidence and treat her as an intimate friend who would be
      delighted to know all about him. When the conversation was over he regretted that it had
      begun; he accused himself of sentimentality, of being led away by his feelings, and indulging
      in what the French call effusion. Nevertheless, a morning seldom ended before Lady May had
      taken up the thread of sentiment again, while appearing to be merely absorbed or unhappy, and
      Glanville had suffered another of the silken meshes to be woven about him. Now he was under
      the enchanter's spell; he fancied he could move when he desired, that he had only to will; and
      he was forgetting that to will under certain circumstances is the whole, but an insuperable,
      difficulty. A single word would break the spell; but how was he to utter it? On the contrary,
      he began whispering to himself that such confidences were very pleasant; that he knew where to
      stop; that there was no reason why he should not be Lady May's best friend; that he had not
      thought she could be so fascinating; that if he did care a great deal for her it would do no
      harm; that—he woke up one morning with something like a guilty conscience and began to
      deliberate whether he could stay at the Court and not ask Lord
       Trelingham to consent to their marriage. Was he so sure, then, of the lady's
      consent? He was no coxcomb; and yet he was sure. By a thousand tokens May Davenant had
      convinced him that he was the most interesting man she had met. To confess it in direct terms
      was neither possible, nor becoming, nor necessary. He knew it. Even now he did not say to
      himself that she was in love with him; but he felt no anxiety. The question he had asked in
      his own mind, as he walked up and down the front terrace on a certain afternoon, seemed now to
      have an answer. Could he live without one who captivated his feelings, who would be happy to
      share his life, who was capable of splendid enthusiasm? Her position might demand an alliance
      with rank; but her extraordinary gifts made her worthy to be the helpmate of genius.
Glanville did not speak much that morning; but he looked often at Lady May, and the glance
      of soft inquiring meditation, which had never before lighted on her, stirred her heart with an
      expectant thrill. She could not meet his eyes, but a gentle blush, a sense of overwhelming
      diffidence, which gave to her motions a distracted and yet not ungraceful hesitation,
      betokened that love, waiting so long for a response, was now certain that it would not be
      withheld. The morning was still and autumnal; but in Lady May's heart rose the delicious
      feeling of spring. She was no longer miserable; the clouds were dispersing, and the sun was
      coming out. She felt that
       love was answering love; and while her own was intensified, it was humbled too.
      Had she done that which was unmaidenly? had there been a lack of reticence, a boldness in
      speaking of what she had thought and suffered? She hoped not; she trusted not. But all would
      be well now. These first green buds were like the promise of a glorious summer; they gave her
      inexpressible delight. Nor was Glanville quite destitute of similar feelings. He knew that she
      was pleased and happy; confidence between them seemed natural enough now, and he was sure it
      would last. He did not think Lord Trelingham could resist an only daughter's wishes. His own
      success had been too brilliant and unmistakable to allow of the difficulties being raised
      which are commonly brought forward in such cases. He would finish the Madonna of the Seraphim
      before taking any step. There must be no chance of an abrupt termination to the task he had
      begun. But, on the day after he had restored the picture, he would demand the hand of Lady
      May. That, and that alone, should be his recompense. Nor would he give occasion to malice by
      attempting to gain the lady's consent before her father's. It should not be said of him that
      he had taken the Earl at a disadvantage. Had his affection been as strong as he imagined
      perhaps he had not behaved so punctiliously; he might have found himself saying more than he
      intended, and betraying a secret that lovers cannot easily keep. Anyhow, he resolved to
      wait.

The last sitting was over. Glanville, thinking himself much enamoured of the lady, paid her
      no compliments; but, with the delicate flattery of the artist, spoke of the expression,
      temper, and make of soul which went with this or that detail in the copy he was taking from
      nature. He felt satisfied that the task was done, and, as he thought, not unworthily. There
      remained the more difficult enterprise, to transfer the features of Lady May to the original
      canvas, now set up at the end of the gallery and waiting the master's touch. Curtains drawn
      round it concealed from profane eyes the havoc that remained, though Ivor had smoothed away
      crease and hollow, making, by the aid of some secret in alchemy, a restoration so perfect that
      the Earl wondered and Glanville was astounded. The engraver would not allow any one else to
      view his triumph. He insisted, mildly, but with the authority of a benefactor, on hiding the
      Madonna of the Seraphim in a kind of artist's sanctuary until it shone out in splendour as
      before the morning it was ruined. Glanville agreed, and, as he could not execute what amounted
      to a tour de force in the light-handed way he had taken with Lady May's portrait, it
      was resolved that the gallery should remain open, but the farther end be cut off and fitted up
      as a studio, where Rupert, assisted by his friend, might work unhindered.
With a mixture of pain and expectation, Lady May rose for the last time from the chair in
      which
       she had sat and dreamt over her life during all those mornings. She put away the
      heavy crimson dress, sighing as she did so, and wondering whether the Madonna of the Seraphim
      would become to her an intolerable memory or, as Dante sings, 'the beginning and the cause of
      all joy.' The tremendous inward conflict, the intense longing and ardour of resolution had
      left her exhausted, like a medium who has with difficulty succeeded in mesmerising a reluctant
      will. And was she successful? She did not know. Rupert's countenance told her so little. She
      saw him vanish with her portrait behind the voluminous curtains of his improvised studio; and
      she walked slowly away, feeling like one that has witnessed the fourth act of a tragedy and is
      uncertain how the fifth will turn out. Alas that the tragedy was her own! She was expectant,
      not sanguine. It was part of 'love's fine wit,' that she anticipated on the day when the
      picture was restored the dénouement of these most wretched uncertainties. She must
      live through the interval as she could. It was not easy. Passion is one of the sleepless gods;
      it watched by her day and night, banished repose from her pillow, took the colour from her
      cheek, steeped her very music in bitterness, languor, and excitement, in delirious joy and
      quickly succeeding pain. She had been, in earlier times, a bold horsewoman, somewhat to the
      scandal of Lord Trelingham's acquaintance, but it was an exercise she had forsworn and she
      would not return to it. Had the chalet been untenanted she
       might have spent her worst hours there, unobserved by the guests who were
      constantly coming and going at the Court. But now she felt like a wounded animal that has no
      place to creep into. She knew not what to anticipate nor how she should act. There was, in the
      whole world, no single creature with whom she could take counsel; and the gnawing pain at her
      heart grew, until she feared in a sudden frenzy of the nerves to betray her secret and be
      disgraced for ever. Day after day she wandered about the beach, choosing the most lonely
      situations and walking on and on wherever the strip of sand was wide enough to leave a passage
      at the foot of the cliffs. She was not much the better for it all; her sleep after such
      prolonged exertion was broken and feverish. She seemed to be living on wild hopes which would
      not bear examination. Now and then a passing look, a word from Glanville revived her. But that
      was little enough, and there was nothing else.
At length the decisive morning came, towards the end of October, when the still air seems
      tranquil, not melancholy, and there are frequent gleams of sunshine. Glanville had been
      absorbed in his work, not allowing himself a moment's leisure while daylight lasted. He could
      think of nothing else. All the airy shapes that filled his imagination had taken wings; he
      forgot even the motive with which an artist is commonly credited—the love of fame. One purpose
      took possession of him—to make this picture as perfect as he might; to enter into the heart of
      that
       dead Friar who had painted it and wrest from him the secret of its loveliness.
      He felt that to restore was, in this instance, to create anew. Rupert had learnt when he was
      very young, what many artists have not discovered when they lay down their pencil,—at twenty
      he said to himself that the painter who has not lived in his picture will never make it live
      to others; that drawing and colouring are the hands, but imagination is the eye and the soul.
      In delineating the countenance of May Davenant he had seen only the lady before him; in
      reproducing it he forgot her, and in spirit went back to the world of religious types and
      ecstatic imaginations wherein Fray Raimondo had beheld the Virgin of the Seraphim ere he
      depicted her to others. The enthusiasm which dominated Glanville was not love; it was
      antagonistic to love; but he might have made to Lady May the excuse which Andrea del Sarto
      offered to his angry wife—that he forgot her for herself. There was no room then for a double
      worship; he was living, contemplating, loving with Fray Raimondo, two centuries ago, in a
      southern land and among a medieval populace.
There are dramatic painters no less than dramatic poets, men who throw themselves into a
      mood, a character, a whole epoch, with such intense realisation that the feelings spring up in
      them which correspond with the scene they are describing, and out of that vivid illusion they
      extract truth and summon the past from its grave. When the short afternoon compelled
       him regretfully to put down his brushes, he still went on dreaming of San Lucar
      and the monk in his cell, with the golden vision steadfast above him. This man of the world
      became a child, a mortified recluse, a seer at the gate of heaven; for the time being he was
      neither sarcastic nor melancholy. He would not have chosen the subject; he painted no Madonnas
      of his own accord; but since it was given to him, the instinct which made him an artist
      impelled him to obey the law of inspiration whereby he had succeeded hitherto.
None but Ivor Mardol saw the work advance. The friends were much together and communicative
      as usual on the points raised in its execution. But on other things they were silent. Each had
      a secret of his own which concerned Lady May, and neither could utter it. Glanville, indeed,
      looked forward to the marriage on which he had, I will not say set his hopes, but made up his
      mind. Yet he was no more excited when he thought of it than if some one had told him that
      there would be rain in the evening. Had he cared half as much as the lady who was waiting
      breathlessly for the fifth act to commence, he would have found his tongue, and surprised Ivor
      with his eloquence. Then, too, he might have seen into the bosom of his friend, whose thwarted
      affection, purifying itself like an ascending flame, was not to be quenched, but transformed
      into the rarest sentiment of chivalry. Ivor was more tender than passionate; the pity which
      was almost born with him coloured
       his every feeling, even that friendship for Rupert, wherein pity might have
      seemed to find no place. Much more did it warm and melt his being when the haggard looks of
      Lady May told him, the most observant and most unobtrusive of spectators, that she was
      suffering. It was a feeling which softened his disappointment and took away the eagerness
      that, under other circumstances, would have prompted him to pour his confidences into the ear
      of Rupert. A necessary reserve grew up between them, not weakening their affection, but
      marking another stage in the friendship which had united them. It was destined to exert a
      momentous influence on their lives when the threads had grown more entangled.
So the morning arrived, bright and clear, on which Glanville proposed to unveil the Madonna
      of the Seraphim. There were no strangers in the house except himself and Ivor, both of whom
      had by this time a false air, as the French say, of belonging to the domain. Even Mr.
      Truscombe had not been invited. Lord Trelingham, in his rare visits to the gallery, chiefly
      during the earlier sittings, had made various suggestions with regard to the tone and
      expression of the vanished countenance. His memory for technical details and accessories was
      excellent, and, thanks to it, Glanville had reproduced the style, if not the actual
      peculiarities, of ornament and setting. The Earl would not interrupt him while engaged on the
      picture itself; but he came when Glanville was not working, marked the changes
       that he judged indispensable, and offered his advice with the respect due to a
      great artist. It was generally to the purpose; nor did Rupert pique himself on knowing the
      original better than those who had seen it. When the last colour was laid on, Lord Trelingham
      took what he called a private view and came away delighted. The painting was hung in its
      former place, the purple veil, which still had Lady Elizabeth's name upon it, was drawn in
      front; and on the pleasant forenoon of the day appointed the little family group stood before
      it in expectation.
Rupert was still in the enthusiastic mood of Fray Raimondo; only by an effort could he
      remember that he had promised himself a reward which to-morrow he must demand or renounce for
      ever. Lady May superstitiously expected to read her fate in the unveiled picture; and Tom and
      the Countess, who were standing side by side, the least concerned of all, felt vaguely that an
      atmosphere of unrest surrounded them. Karina had not discovered Lady May's secret; she fancied
      more than she knew; while of Glanville she could make nothing whatever. His mind was a sealed
      volume which required a mightier spell than hers to unlock it. She whispered to her cousin
      that there ought to be an overture before the curtain drew up; but Lady May did not answer.
      The Earl looked graver than usual, for he was thinking of that other morning, when the young
      Alice and Edgar Valence exchanged, in the presence of this same Madonna, the pledges that had
      bereft him of
       a friend and a sister. His eyes turned more than once towards Lady May,
      inquiringly, anxiously, as if he were struck with her resemblance to her unhappy aunt.
There was no overture, nor was any needed. When Ivor drew aside the veil a sight as
      beautiful as ever graced the eyes of mortals broke upon them. The picture, as they remembered
      it after the storm, was blurred in a hundred places, and the countenance of the Virgin had
      disappeared under dust and defilement. But now! It was a new creation. The seal of age could
      not remain intact; fresh colours, though exquisitely blent with the old, took something of its
      two centuries from the painting. But there was no crudeness, no offensive novelty; a light and
      delicate touch had given radiance to what was dim and effect to what was faded. The splendour
      of the vision came back, the heavenly dyes of angelic raiment, the brightness of the martyrs'
      crimson, the golden emerald of the far-off gleaming gates. Most wonderful of all, the
      countenance that had been lost was visible once more, drawing all eyes to it, in calm
      unconscious beauty, not looking down towards earth, but already enlightened, as it should
      seem, with the glory that falls from the Great White Throne. It was not a likeness of any
      human face; if it resembled Lady May, the expression transcended all that had ever shone upon
      her features. Instead of the proud, self-centred look, there was unspeakable innocence,
      humility, gladness, a pure light on the
       brow, a tenderness in the gentle eyes, a majesty blent with meekness in the pose
      of the head, which bore its diadem of glittering stones as if they had been flowers. The sense
      of eternal triumph might be discerned in the movement of that glorious procession, as it swept
      through the air and mounted towards the stars of God. Quitting the world of clouds it had
      attained the region of transparent light; nor was there a reminiscence of pain or grief on any
      countenance. The martyrs seemed springing to a new and divine life out of the wine-dark tide
      into which they had been plunged; the cherubim, with the rose of everlasting youth upon their
      wings, soared upward like lambent fire.
Not a word was spoken for some minutes. In the highest human achievement there is ever
      something which appears to be more than human, and before which praise and criticism are alike
      trivial. What struck Lady May with astonishment was that she could not recognise herself. That
      serene countenance was not her own. She had never cherished the meek thoughts that looked out
      of those eyes, nor loved humility and patience, nor resigned herself to sorrow, like that
      maiden who was ascending into a realm of peace she should never know. Whence had come the
      artist's inspiration? If her dissatisfied spirit had passed into him, if the influence she
      strove to exert had made a conquest of his being, he might have painted as splendid a Madonna,
      but it would not have been such as this. 'No,' she said, 'he could have
       painted no Madonna. I am only fit to be the type of a different woman—a sinful,
      ambitious, despairing creature, for whom heaven and its glory are a legend.' She read in the
      beautiful painting a condemnation of her hopes. If Glanville's imagining was of this lofty
      kind, he would never stoop to her. Was he, then, a religious fanatic, or where had he seen the
      innocent loveliness here depicted so truthfully? Morning after morning he had fixed his eyes
      on her, as she sat before him, only at last to create a vision in which she could claim no
      part. Rupert's genius was her rival; he could always evoke phantoms whose surpassing beauty
      would make hers seem poor and common. It was a bitter disappointment. She could not speak; her
      very heart grew chill and heavy, and her lips turned pale.
Lord Trelingham came to her relief. He enlarged on the likeness and unlikeness between old
      and new; what had been of necessity put in, what, on the other hand, it was impossible to
      restore. He praised Glanville for having produced exactly the effect which must have been
      intended by Fray Raimondo. Neither did he forget Ivor's share in the restoration. He turned
      the picture this way and that to show how smooth was the surface; he made the Countess view
      through a glass the extraordinary way in which the colours stood out from it and were at once
      solid and transparent. The delicately-painted foreground, the middle distance, the
      perspective, were all discriminated and discussed; while Lady May
       endeavoured to recover her voice, and Tom Davenant listened respectfully without
      comprehending half a sentence. Karina knew more of painting than might have been expected; she
      had travelled along the famous picture-galleries, and had painted a little herself. She,
      therefore, kept Lady May in countenance, and atoned for her shortcomings as duenna by saying
      now all that was required in commendation of Glanville, and encouraging Lord Trelingham to
      prolong his discourse. Rupert was not a man to gape after flattery. He knew that the Earl's
      praise was sincere; the Countess did not talk nonsense, though her remarks were acute rather
      than profound; and Lady May's continued silence gave token that she was too much affected by
      his triumph to speak. When at last she murmured a word or two, though he could not catch what
      she said, he answered smilingly. His own enthusiasm was not yet exhausted. He left them
      commenting on the picture, and went out for a solitary walk in the Chase.
He did not return to luncheon. The dinner-hour came and he was still absent. What could have
      detained him? Ten o'clock struck, and eleven; it was close upon midnight and he had not come.
      Lady May, restless and impatient, asked herself whether the suspense would never end, the
       dénouement never arrive. What was Rupert doing? or had anything befallen him?

