
CHAPTER XXXI ANARCHY IN PURPLE
Rupert sent a faithful account of the conversation between himself and Ivor that
      same night to Mr. Bernstein. It was like acting the spy and the traitor, but he said, while
      engaged upon it, 'The curtain has drawn up, I have come before the footlights, and, so long as
      the play lasts, I must be true to the character I have assumed, not to Rupert Glanville, who
      lies in a magic sleep.' He could not unravel the threads of Mardol's discourse when reflecting
      on it, nor had he dreamt that so calm and metaphysical a mind could thus develop the gifts of
      an arch-intriguer. When would the imposture burst? And how long should he be compelled to wait
      until the reappearance of Hippolyta? However, he gave up rambling through the ways of the
      metropolis, dizzied himself with occupation, and, as in the days when he was longing for the
      one who had now abandoned him, rode from morn till dusk, and came in half-dead with fatigue.
       It was an inexpressible relief to him when Ivor ran hastily in on a mild and
      spring-like evening, soon after he had taken off his riding-things—for he had only just come
      in from a long expedition out of town—and said to him, 'You are to meet the Athenians this
      evening; how long will it take you to get ready?'
'Must I dress?' inquired Rupert; 'what do the Athenians wear—a chlamys or a chiton? I
      haven't got either in the house; we shall have to adjourn to my studio.'
'I am sorry to say there is no need,' returned Ivor; 'they wear the ordinary evening dress
      of European gentlemen. But the distance is considerable. Do you know the Duke of Adullam's
      house at—?' He mentioned an outskirt of London. On hearing the Duke's name Rupert turned round
      and laughed.
'Are you acquainted with him?' inquired the artist. 'I thought you never entered the society
      of Dukes.'
'I have entered his,' was the reply, 'and must do so again. He invites you to dinner; but I
      may as well warn you that after dinner, when the uninitiated have taken their leave, we shall
      hold open lodge for your benefit. I am keeping my ill-given promise to introduce you as a
      candidate. The rest you will look to yourself. A wrong answer, a slightly too conservative
      opinion, may ruin you.'
'Then you must coach me before we start,' said Rupert. 'I am quick at catching the sense, or
      nonsense, of a brief. Tell me what is expected,
       and I will mouth faithfully what madness would gambol from,—how do the verses
      run?'
'Be serious,' his friend said. He was afraid of these high spirits, which prompted Rupert
      sometimes to dangerous frivolity. 'What is expected of you is to show that you understand and
      sympathise with the Revolution. If you have the principles sound within you, the words will
      come of themselves. But let me tell you that you will meet men of quick discernment.'
'And is the Duke a Socialist?' laughed Rupert, going off to dress.
'You shall know when you have passed your examination,' said Ivor.
Rupert quickly finished his transformation, and when he came down, the two apparently
      devoted friends, in whose hearts such different feelings were ascendant, drove at a rapid pace
      along the western road, and found themselves, towards eight o'clock, traversing the country
      lanes under the dim radiance of the stars. Glanville, though like the rest of civilised men he
      knew by repute the house to which they were going, had never seen the outside of the park in
      which it stood; nor had he met the Duke of Adullam.
This Scriptural name, which conceals an illustrious and very ancient title, had been given
      to the Duke by his intimate friends, as well as by his inveterate enemies, for much the same
      reasons which made it a political weapon of offence on a memorable
       occasion. Before his father's decease the Duke had figured in the House of
      Commons as a leader of opposition, whose reckless and daring eloquence, combined with a
      personal charm which few could resist, had threatened to sweep away a Ministry and to break up
      a party. That the party happened to be his own, and the Ministry that of their opponents,
      seemed not to trouble him at all, and added a bizarre interest to the man whose pleasure
      evidently lay in making mischief and leaving others to pay for it.
But at the opportune moment, when both sides of the House were trembling with dismay, a god
      appeared out of the machine and the country was saved. It was no other than Hermes, who
      conducts the shades to Charon's ferry. The Duke, the old Duke, our present Duke's father, was
      struck with apoplexy, whether on seeing his son's disregard of the sacred obligations of
      party, or in the natural course, was not apparent. But he did the one thing asked of him—he
      died,—and his son was rapt in a golden cloud to the House of Lords. The party was not
      dissolved, and the Ministry did not resign. These latter gentlemen, in the fulness of their
      hearts, would have offered the dead Duke a public vote of thanks and his remains a
      resting-place in Westminster Abbey, could they have discovered any other service he had done
      the nation save that of dying at the right conjuncture. As it was, they found some relief to
      their joyous feelings in condoling with the
       House of Commons on the loss it had sustained by the Marquis of—'s translation
      to another place. The new Duke was not vindictive, but he felt the wound. Henceforth, although
      he did not openly proclaim war against the social order, he patronised all those that did. In
      becoming a Duke he felt that he had ceased to be a leader of men.
He set about showing his resentment, however, in a way of his own. The late member of the
      House of Commons and leader of a democratic section therein, became at one stroke its severest
      critic and, as the unthinking public supposed, a High Tory. He had sometimes affected the
      magnificent style of Edmund Burke,—he was clever at adopting any style for the nonce,—and had
      termed the Commons' House the august depositary of the rights and liberties of Englishmen. He
      now turned completely round. In many a winged speech, barbed with truth and polished like the
      edge of a razor, he showed that if Parliament was the acme of respectabilities, it was, for
      that very reason, a bundle of vested interests bound round the axe or the tax-gatherer, as the
      rods were tied about the Roman lictor's. His picturesque words and bold delivery drew cheers
      and laughter from the crowd, whom he was careful not to identify with a vulgar House of
      Commons. His epigrams, witty as they were cynical, made a stir in the languid air of society,
      and were relished by those who despised not only the degenerate Parliament of England, but all
       Parliaments and all peoples. His reputation rose higher than ever, and prophets
      were not wanting who spoke of the coming Tory Prime Minister as one that would bring back the
      days of Pitt and Chatham. They were in the wrong. After making a brilliant début in
      the House of Lords,—which, however, though he charmed never so wisely, could not be persuaded
      to sit over the dinner-hour—and when he might have spent his days in receiving informal
      deputations from all the interests at which he gibed, the Duke suddenly abandoned politics,
      and was seen no more on platforms. He had found, or was endeavouring, like Tiberius, to
      invent, a new excitement. When he was tired of attacking respectability he outraged it.
      Hitherto a man of average, if not of irreproachable conduct, he shocked every one by publicly
      professing, in modern London, the principles of the Regent Orléans. That he chose to practise
      them was, in comparison with this parade of belief in them, venial and trifling. Society has
      never thought it right to interfere with a man's private pleasures, least of all with those of
      a great Duke. But it does insist, on this side of the English Channel, that vice shall pay due
      homage to virtue, whether in the shape of hypocrisy, or in that of reserve and a decent
      reticence. The Duke was not married; and it would have contributed to the happiness of others
      in his own rank with whom he was on intimate terms, had they not been married either. It had
      been said, with some truth, that
       no woman could resist him. They did not always make the attempt. He was
      perfectly unscrupulous, foolhardy, and unblushing. His reputation among decent people was that
      of a man who had shamed his pedigree, his order, his relations, his acquaintance. He would
      have sought admittance in vain at doors which would be gladly thrown open, à deux
       battants , as the French say, to visitors that brought with them only the shadow of his
      strawberry leaves. But he did not seek admittance at such. He went into circles which gave him
      an affectionate welcome, and he sounded the almost unfathomable depths of refined and cultured
      vice. He was still in the prime of manhood. At twenty-five he had achieved fame in the House
      of Commons; he was not seven and twenty when a malignant fate decreed that he should sink into
      inglorious ease among the peers of the realm. And he was now enjoying an evil reputation of
      some ten years' standing. All this was matter of extreme notoriety; it might be known to the
      dogs in the street, and it could not escape the ears of Glanville, who, though not mixing in
      the society haunted by the Duke, had often heard his character discussed, and was aware that
      he sheltered under his roof every kind of doubtful person, foreign and domestic, making
      himself still a leader in those private coteries which influence the rise and fall of
      Governments, the success of opera-singers, and the fortunes of a play. It was from the
      universal access which distressed persons had to the Duke, especially if
       their character was at a discount, or the police took an interest in them, that
      he had acquired the title of Adullam, and his villa, to which Rupert and Ivor were now drawing
      near, that of the 'Cave.'
In spite of the disenchantment which Glanville had experienced during the last few days in
      regard to Ivor, he could not refrain from feeling, and expressing, his surprise that so
      austere a personage should endure the acquaintance of the Duke of Adullam. Ivor answered very
      little. He warned Rupert that until his initiation should be complete, and his loyalty to the
      brethren tested, there were matters of consequence which he must take as he found them, for no
      explanation would be forthcoming. If he dreamt of purchasing secrets to-morrow by taking an
      oath this evening, he would be grievously disappointed. The artist bit his lips and kept
      silent. Evidently there was a struggle impending in the future that would call out all his
      energies. He must be wary and not impulsive, or his defeat was certain.
Buried in these reflections, which did not tend to raise his spirits, Glanville hardly
      noticed that they were passing through the gates of a lodge and entering a long avenue which
      was formed by great trees, the outline of whose stems and foliage, dimly visible under the
      stars, was no less grand than sombre. It might be some half-mile to the house; and, as they
      approached it, they saw the front door open, several other carriages standing before it as
       if just drawn up, and the windows right and left blazing with lights. They got
      out, and, passing up the wide steps to a terrace bordered with flowers, which were all dark
      and asleep in the night-time, entered a splendid hall hung round with paintings. Ivor, the shy
      and philosophic Ivor, appeared to be at home in the midst of these grandeurs; the servants
      likewise seemed to know him well, and for the first time in his life Rupert felt that he was
      under the protection of a man from whom, however great his affection might have been for him,
      he had never anticipated that particular kind of service.
They were shown into a smaller room, fitted up as a salon in the style of Louis
      XV., where they found the Duke awaiting his guests. It was, Ivor said in the carriage, to be a
      bachelors' party. Rupert was introduced by his engraver friend, whom the Duke lightly rallied
      for having deserted the Cave so many months together. Ivor Mardol replied that business had
      taken him abroad for one thing, and that principle had kept him at home for another. His Grace
      of Adullam smiled. He was a singularly prepossessing man, though not exactly handsome. But
      Rupert liked a human being to show some individual traits of character, even at the cost of a
      little beauty, and not to be eternally reminding one of that sad, unsatisfying Antinous. The
      Duke's figure was well proportioned and he seemed neither tall nor short, though he stood six
      feet in actual measurement. His motions were graceful as a
       panther's, his voice lingered in the memory; and the large dark eyes, flaming
      like a basilisk's, told, no less than the melancholy passionate mouth, of a spirit that
      suffered the reverse of the pain of Tantalus, —not the longing before satiety, but the despair
      which comes after it. Ivor, when the Duke moved away, turned to his friend and said, 'What do
      you think of him? I have invented a Shakespearian compound name for the kind; I call it
      "restless-drooping."' The artist assented, but thought he should like to hear more of the
      voice that corresponded to the countenance and figure.
He was not to be baulked. When the number of guests was full they went rather silently into
      the dining-room, which was long and narrow, not unlike the picture-gallery at Trelingham,
      fitted up with a panelling of dark polished wood against which shone marble statues of
      exquisite loveliness. The lights were low and soft, except where they threw a blaze from above
      on the dinner-table; and somewhere in the distance might be heard the sound of running water,
      a subdued ripple which seemed unconsciously to tone the conversation that ensued and fill up
      its pauses. Rupert was charmed and, he could not but allow, surprised. Not that he had
      imagined he was invited to a noisy rout; the Duke was well known for his extreme refinement,
      and had never mixed with the rabble which stands on the outskirts of the highest society as on
      those of the lowest. But he had looked for something different.
       Were the guests around him anarchists? He examined them one by one. There were
      sixteen at table counting the Duke, who, as Rupert was again astonished to observe, had seated
      Ivor in the place of distinction at his right hand, where he talked to him earnestly. The
      young man took his honours with unruffled mien and seemed entirely at his ease. There was now
      no shade of anxiety on his brow. Again Glanville marvelled that he should be so thorough an
      adept in dissimulation. Ivor, he said to himself, knew that he had taken Hippolyta from his
      friend, and that his friend knew it. And he was sitting with that friend at the same table as
      completely unmoved, as entirely master of himself, as though his loyalty had been unimpeached
      and unimpeachable. What a vile masquerade was life and friendship!
His thoughts reverted to the others. Were they indeed patrons or partisans of anarchy? The
      table at which they were met was a Duke's; the wines, the viands, the flowers that bloomed
      around them, were each in their kind rare and exquisite. Life in these climates had nothing
      more perfect to show on its material side; the senses were gratified to their highest, and
      every crumpled rose-leaf that could trouble their enjoyment was swept away. He noted the
      conversation. It was clever and ingenious, but at times something too searched-out,—he found
      himself saying with Holofernes, 'too peregrinate,'—to bear the stamp of unpremeditated gaiety.
      Nor was it exactly gay.
       It was high-pitched and then languorous, abounding in prose which apparently
      exhausted the resources of impassioned verse, yet could not express its meaning to the
      speaker's satisfaction. Some of the guests were gentle almost to effeminacy, and their
      out-of-the-way learning contrasted singularly with the mincing, tender tones in which they
      gave utterance to it. Two or three past the first years of old age were, on the other hand,
      grave, sententious, and majestic. Wearing the Florentine lucco instead of the black
      dress-coat and waistcoat, they might have come straight from the Purgatorio of Dante,
      with their earnest gestures and slow sonorous voices. These were not all English, like the
      young, wild-haired—and perhaps, in spite of their seriousness, hare-brained—dilettanti whom
      Rupert recognised as of the class which is perpetually discoursing of poems and pictures,
      though incapable of creating either. What struck him in all the talk was its chaotic nature.
      Not only did every man appear to have different patterns of heaven, earth, and hell from those
      which his neighbour carried, but the number of discordant patterns in each sample-book was
      without end. These strange guests, who did not mention or call each other by their names, had
      read everything, seen everything, and travelled everywhere. They had opened Pandora's box and
      rifled it of its contents, but not one of them had found Hope at the bottom. He could not but
      allow that they were erudite, refined, polished to excess; but the refinement seemed to have
      undone the work of
       travel and experience; it had taken the life out of these men and extinguished
      in them the last spark of spontaneity. Art had overcome Nature; the fine-spun inner clothing
      had completely wrapped up and overlaid that fine-spun inner flesh that we call temperament and
      genius. There could be no passion where there was no fire; but the curious fact remained that
      in every sentence enough passion was breathed forth to outdo Cleopatra and Sappho. Rupert
      laughed inwardly when he perceived that he could remember only the names of women to match
      these simulacra of men.
Yes, they were anarchists surely. They denied, doubted, disparaged; they had nothing but
      refined scorn for all that makes life worth living. They called nothing into existence; they
      satirised everything that was not sensuous feeling, that did not feed delightful moments.
      Glanville had long detested morbidezza in painting; he saw it here and hated it in
      literature and life. The deity worshipped by this company was ρωςπτερος ,—the
      wingless, earthly love which turns life into a frenzied lyrical chant, and steeps the senses
      in earth-born parfumes. In like manner the high thoughts which for him made the literature of
      the world an inspired, heroic Bible, sank down here to the wine-crowned parables of Hafiz. Had
      he come by mistake into a Paradise of sensuous delights instead of the ambrosial supper for
      which Ivor had prepared him? Was the Duke of Adullam no better than this? He had supposed that
      transcendent
       disdain of conventionalities lay at the root of his daring conduct. If he was
      only a treble-distilled Sybarite, a nature all softness and attar of roses, how came Ivor
      Mardol to be intimate with him? Rupert, who had said very little hitherto, looked at them both
      and wondered.
The Duke caught his eye. 'I cannot thank you enough,' he said to Glanville in a most winning
      voice, 'for bringing our John the Baptist back again.'
'Do you mean my friend?' said the artist. 'I was not aware that he had been preaching in the
      wilderness. I thought he was always sure of a good audience among—'
'Hush,' said the Duke, with a well-feigned expression of dismay, 'it matters not among whom.
      But look at the glasses standing by him; you will see that he deserves his name.'
Rupert glanced across the table, and perceived that Ivor had taken no wine. The array of
      glasses stood empty and dishonoured.
'You see,' said the Duke, 'such is the defiance held out by our friend on the first night of
      our restored amity. He will not touch wine or strong drink. Like another Baptist—though I may
      have my doubts whether he is heralding a fresh Gospel—he symbolically rebukes the New
      Paganism, of which wine is the emblem and Dionysus the father. You, I know, will be on our
      side. Your paintings have nothing of John the Baptist in them.'
'Truly not much,' returned the artist, smiling; 'but
       I have long since given up the thought of persuading my friend to enjoy life.
      Lately,' he went on, with a bitter meaning in the words, 'he may have come to view things in a
      more joyous mood, and to find nectar in the rosebud.'
'Indeed?' cried the Duke eagerly. 'What, the Spartan turned Epicurean! Pray take off his
      pallium and show us the man of pleasure beneath it.'
'I may some day,' was Rupert's grave answer. 'At present I am not sure that he has not kept
      a second pallium in reserve.'
Ivor looked at him uneasily. Was Rupert jesting or in earnest? It would serve no good
      purpose to let the Duke misunderstand.
'His Grace knows,' said Ivor, 'that I was brought up a water-drinker and vegetarian. I admit
      that I have not kept my creed entire. I eat the flesh of bird and beast, as you see; but I
      cannot become a complete renegade, so I abstain from wine.'
'And you still condemn luxury?' asked the Duke.
'Not among Athenians,' said Ivor, smiling. 'I wait till I get to Sparta.'
'You catch the allusion?' the Duke inquired, addressing the artist, who replied that he did
      in a measure.
'Let me endeavour to fill up the measure,' said the Duke pleasantly, at the same time
      keeping his fingers twined about the stem of his champagne glass, which an attendant was
      replenishing. 'What we have to consider—we, I mean, to whom the future
       outweighs the present—is what sort of republic shall succeed the monarchies now
      going to pieces all over Europe before our eyes. Shall it be a republic of all the virtues, or
      a republic of all the pleasures—?'
'Why not combine both?' said Rupert.
'There spoke the artist,' exclaimed his Grace of Adullam,—'the artist to whom pleasure is
      only a form of virtue, or virtue a form of pleasure. But it cannot be, I fear. You know there
      are bourgeois virtues which it is not fit for a gentleman, and much less a lady, to practise.
      And there are gentlemanly vices the absence of which in our republic would make it, what I
      sometimes dread it is going to be, excessively dull.'
'That was for a long while my objection to Socialism,' said Rupert; 'it might be justice
      personified, if you please; but how distressingly ugly the ancient dame appeared!'
'Oh quite, quite,' said one of the guests with gentle horror; 'a state of things in which
      one would be forbidden to scent one's self with sandal-wood because it was of no service to
      draymen!'
'And where, as there were no poor, there could be no rich,' said another. 'Think what would
      become of you and me if we happened not to be rich. We should expire in agony within
      twenty-four hours.'
'It is just as well, then,' interposed Ivor, with a doubtful smile on his features, 'that
      you decided not to be born at Sparta. You remember the law of Lycurgus about those who were
      deformed from their birth, and Taygetus?'

'What, then, are the rich, and the artists, and the cultivated minority in general, to do
      when the good time comes?' demanded Rupert; 'Taygetus will not be large enough to hold them,
      any more than the valley of Jehoshaphat will hold everybody at the Last Day.'
'You have stated the problem,' said the Duke, 'and it behoves those whom it chiefly
      concerns, that minority of which the existence would be imperilled,— and all we at this table
      belong to it,—to discover the solution. Sparta will clearly be fatal to us. I have been
      saying, therefore, to such as I could influence —they are not many—why not try Athens? One or
      the other we shall surely come to.'
'But neither of them,' said one of the grave old men that had not yet spoken, 'was a
      republic. You don't suppose all that dwelt in Athens were free citizens. And at Sparta,
      besides the ordinary slaves, there were the Helots.'
'I grant you,' said the Duke, 'as much ancient history as you can require. But I am still
      anxious to know what will become of us, who are not dead and illustrious, when there is a
      universal Republic and no guillotine for aristocrats.'
'These are mere questions of the day,' replied the old man. 'Why trouble ourselves with what
      is in all the newspapers? Art and literature—surely these are a realm of serene tranquillity
      in which we may live. The rest is like a far-off storm at sea.'
'Yes,' said Rupert; 'we may escape into the Ideal
       until the floods invade it and swallow artist and poet alike. The waves are
      mounting, and who will build us an ark?'
'Just so; I like your way of putting it,' said the Duke. 'There will be hardly terra
       firma left on which to build an ark, even as small as Noah's, if we do not begin at
      once. But suppose we could teach the many-headed monster that he need not be afraid of us,
      that our existence enlarges the possibilities of his, that even luxury will provide bread for
      his table?'
'He will want your luxury, too,' said Ivor, 'as soon as he can lay hands on it.'
'Well, let him,' answered the Duke, 'and then he may come to me. I will show him that
      luxury, though indispensable to dukes and the like unhappy creatures, would only take away his
      chance of happiness if he gave himself to it. However, what we want is Athens. The barbarous
      interlude, the sort of medieval mystery which we know as the Christian religion, has
      come and is nearly gone. We shall see it out. What remains but the only genuine civilisation
      which has made man human,—made him free, scientific, artistic, passionately poetical? That is
      all summed up in the name of Athens. There is no other. Sparta, Corinth, Rome, are provincial
      towns in the republic of the Ideal. And, therefore, we citizens of the future must call
      ourselves Athenians and resuscitate that humanising polity.'
'Do you propose to make an Athens of London?' inquired Rupert, whose mind went back to the
      days
       and nights he had been spending among its hospitals, workhouses, back lanes, and
      mortuaries. 'I fancy you had better burn it down first, by way of a beginning.'
'Will your friend Ivor Mardol,' inquired the Duke in his turn, 'transform it to a Sparta
      where there shall be neither slaves, Helots, nor black soup?' and he addressed himself to the
      morsel of woodcock on his plate while waiting for an answer.
But Ivor interposed. 'I never said I was a Spartan,' he replied calmly, 'but that is no
      reason why I should allow that Athens and luxury are synonymous. I think a time may come—it
      will come, as I hope—when nothing will be deemed worthy of men except what gives them clearer
      brains and more generous feelings. The art of living stands in as urgent need of revision, nay
      of revolution, as the art of governing. Who is there that knows much of either?'
'Ay,' said the Duke, laughing, 'I told you so. We have come round to the Baptist, with his
      locusts and wild honey.'
Coffee was served, and they adjourned to the salon in which the Duke had received
      his guests on arriving. In no long while about half of those present took their leave. Rupert,
      who could not tell whether his 'examination,' as Ivor called it, had begun or was already
      over, kept his eye on that suspicious friend, whose reserve had hitherto concealed from him
      this extraordinary acquaintance with the Duke of Adullam.
       All reticence between intimates—though some must be unavoidable—has this
      inconvenience: when one secret has come to light a hundred may be suspected, and, like a
      casket in which a false bottom has been discovered, the friendship will seem to be lined with
      reserves innumerable. If Mardol could be on such terms with the Duke, yet his nearest friend
      not know it, why should he not have been acting throughout on principles which would make his
      loyalty a pretence and his affection a snare? But while Glanville was chewing the cud of this
      bitter fancy, the Duke approached and invited him to the smoking-room. Ivor, who was standing
      at no great distance and saw the motion, nodded approval and prepared to follow. The way led
      up a flight of marble steps, along a closed verandah, and into a room illuminated from above
      with a mellow radiance. It was the electric light glowing through yellow and crimson roses
      which seemed to hang from the trellis of an arbour, while mats of gorgeous colours strewed the
      floor, Indian shawls of dead golden hue fell over the entrance and the windows, and a divan of
      softest texture, covered with pale yellow satin, ran round the walls. As in the
      dining-chamber, so here was audible the sound of rippling water mingled with the plash of a
      fountain. The air was not heavy with perfume, but there hung about it the faint, yet pungent,
      fragrance of Eastern tobacco, in which a whole world of reminiscences —Cairo and the Golden
      Horn, and far-off Hindustan —seemed to dose and dream.

'Is this your Nihilist conclave?' whispered Rupert to his companion, as they passed the
      enchanted gateway, and the crimson and golden light came streaming over them.
'Why not?' returned Ivor; 'do you think the Indian shawls will make a difference? It is the
      men, not the room, that constitute a meeting.' They flung themselves on the silken divan.
'Ah,' said Rupert under his breath, 'this is perfect.' He meant the apparition of a
      brown-skinned Nubian boy, of exquisitely regular features, and in Oriental costume of crimson,
      with a yellow turban round his head, who advanced towards them silently when they sat down,
      and offered them in turn a bowl of meerschaum with twisted tube and tobacco of their choice.
      Ivor looked at the boy and laughed, at the same time putting the narghileh away with his hand.
      The Nubian, if such he was, laughed back to him, and in doing so displayed a range of pearly
      teeth between his beautiful lips. He, too, must be familiar with Ivor's ways, said Rupert to
      himself. At that moment the Duke, turning round, caught sight of the pantomime, and shook his
      head mournfully.
'You smoke, I am sure,' he said to Rupert. 'I can see that you believe in the sacred fire.
      This frost-bound philosopher,' indicating Ivor, 'is an infidel and deserves to be immolated on
      a pyre of cigarettes. Yes,' he went on, 'happy is the man that has learned to smoke from his
      youth up. It is the one consolation that can never fail him. But now, Mr.
       Glanville, nerve yourself for the ordeal. You are not ignorant of what is before
      you.'
'Well, I am rather,' answered Glanville. 'I understand that dinner was what Freemasons call
      "open lodge." But what may be coming next I certainly cannot say.'
'Dinner,' replied the Duke, 'never can be anything but open lodge. It is merely the
      vestibule of truth. But the smoking-room is her sanctum. Amid these clouds—the only incense
      left us—she reveals her lineaments, as you will speedily perceive.' Then changing his tone and
      becoming all at once serious, 'My dear artist, I presume you are aware that you have thrust
      yourself into considerable danger in coming hither?'
'Very likely I have,' said Rupert, taking the narghileh from his lips. 'What then?'
'Why then,' answered the Duke, 'everything depends, not on your courage,—I should be the
      last to call it in question,—but on the degree of earnestness with which you have come to
      us.'
At this juncture Rupert's friend rose from the divan, and went over to a group of guests who
      were smoking at a little distance. Glanville and the Duke were in some sense alone, but if
      either raised his voice the conversation would reach listening ears. At present the Duke's
      subdued tones were a hint that he desired the colloquy to be carried on between himself and
      Rupert only.
The latter, with an inquiring look in his eyes,
       faced the Duke, who sat sideways on the divan and smoked very placidly. 'Well?'
      said his Grace.
'I do not know what the earnestness means of which you speak,' said Glanville, 'or what
      guarantee will satisfy you.'
'There is only one condition, and it is guarantee sufficient,' replied the Duke. 'What have
      you lost to put you at enmity with the social order?'
Rupert gave a short, bitter laugh. 'Is that all?' he said. 'I might, if I were overbold; ask
      your Grace that question. What have you lost?'
'Everything,' replied the Duke simply. And when Glanville stared, 'Come,' he said, raising
      his voice, 'this gentleman will not believe that a' duke can be a Nihilist. How shall I
      convince him?'
Four or five of the others, including Ivor, came at these words, and, in the language of the
      theatre, grouped themselves, dramatically, round the Duke and the artist. The rest seemed to
      take no notice and went on with their smoking. The Duke waited, as if for some one to counsel
      him.
'Tell him your life and adventures,' said one.
'Too long,' put in another, as he turned to light a fresh cheroot.
'Tell him mine, then,' retorted the first.
'Yours is too singular to have a moral,' said the second. 'It is horrible besides, and one
      must not begin with a nightmare.'
'The rest are little better,' said the man whose
       story, apparently with his consent, was declared to be a nightmare. And there
      was a pause.
'But,' said the Duke, 'we cannot stay here all night. What is to be done?'
He reflected for a moment, amid the perfect silence which followed his words. The fragrant
      ascending clouds veiled with prismatic vapours the yellow and crimson light of the flower-like
      lamps. Existence, so curtained about with webs of divers colours from the Indian loom, so
      penetrated with aromatic drugs, so wrapped in dreamy lawns of smoke, and illuminated with the
      charmed rays that fell softly from above, seemed to the artist a drowsy, delicious,
      trance-like state wherein was neither pain nor pleasure, but only luxurious repose. Why not go
      on dreaming thus for ever? thought Rupert. There would come no visions of an arduous ideal
      through those silken folds, not even the sound of poetry or music, to suggest the painful
      sweet reminiscences which might stir a man to action. The existence which was all love, and
      passion, and loss, had vanished into the dark night outside. Why should it return and vex him
      any more?
The Duke touched his hand. 'You are falling asleep with your eyes open,' he said; 'look up
      and listen.' Rupert turned slowly towards him with such an expression as we may fancy they had
      who dwelt in the Lotos-land, where it was always afternoon.
'All right,' he said, 'I am listening.'

'Look round you also,' the Duke insisted sharply, and his voice became very stern. 'You wish
      to be one of us. Here, then, are seven men who have joined the party of despair. Can you tell
      why?' He paused, and Rupert, gathering his faculties together, replied:
'How should I know? I never saw one of them before except Ivor.'
'And he,' said the Duke slowly, 'like the rest of this company, has a shattered
      existence.'
'It is a lie,' exclaimed Rupert, springing up; 'he has shattered mine; he has broken my
      heart.' Ivor looked at him, long and sorrowfully, but said nothing.
'Right, right,' said the Duke with amazing tranquillity; 'at last I hear the cry of a
      wounded spirit. Why, man,' he went on, addressing Rupert, whose dreams had fled like a troop
      of frightened deer, 'do you suppose we are playing for amusement? If your friend had not
      assured me that a great grief had smitten you through, these doors had never opened to
      you.'
Rupert, dumfounded at so novel an experience, knew not how to answer. It was clear that, be
      the game jest or earnest, he was playing with men vastly superior to himself in resource and
      cunning. The Duke seemed to perceive what was passing through his mind. With a gentle but
      decisive grasp he drew Rupert to his seat again, and while the others stood about in their
      careless attitudes, he went on:
'You have perhaps, my dear friend, confounded
       us with the ornamental mysteries of the last century. I do not mind being taken
      for a Rosicrucian, or Mesmerist, or what not, by the crowd standing and staring about the
      doors. It is as well they should think we are not much in earnest. But with you it is
      different. If you enter, you belong to us. And you ought to know what binds us together. It is
      not the flimsy threads of sentiments, or philosophy learned by rote, or political clap-trap.
      Every man here brings a ruined life in his hand. The rank and file of our societies, which
      number hundreds of thousands, are made up of those who by hunger, want, misery—and by
      reflection on all that—have been driven to join us. We, I do not say the élite , but
      the few, have suffered neither hunger, nor thirst, nor nakedness. But we have suffered worse.
      We have lost, one in this way, another in that, the good of life. We, too, are stricken so
      deeply that only in the destruction of society, if at all, can we hope for a glimpse of
      happiness.'
Was he listening to a madman? Rupert gazed right and left in search of the answer to this
      enigma. The Duke, watching him, smiled.
'I see that you cannot believe me,' he said. 'You want ocular demonstration. You shall have
      it in good time. Now I will only say this. I am acquainted with the story of every one here,
      though not every one here knows his own.'
'Do you know Ivor's parentage, then?' inquired Rupert eagerly.

'I knew it long ago,' replied the Duke, 'before I had set eyes on him. But I have not
      informed him, nor shall, until it is likely to do him good. Ivor has other things now to
      trouble about besides his parentage.'
The artist could not believe that his friend, who appeared so subdued and patient, would be
      standing by in silence had he given credit to these words. Yet the Duke spoke with authority,
      and the rest seemed to take it as a matter of course.
'You perhaps thought,' resumed this tamer of men, who saw the deep impression his words were
      making on Rupert, 'that by taking a few oaths and professing general principles you might be
      free of the brotherhood. You must now realise that our bond is not so easily put on, and that
      it never can be taken off. There is, or has been, in the life of each one here —and of those
      outside who belong to us—a personal reason why he should despair of the society that has made
      him what he is. Those only give up the past who have nothing more to hope from it. Tell me,
      then, what injury has society inflicted on you?
The artist thought of Hippolyta, and was beside himself with rage. What but the stupid,
      immoral, mercenary, polluting conventions of the world had first made their marriage
      impossible, and now flung her out into danger and loneliness, far from his love and care? That
      pure and lofty spirit had been immolated to the crying social sin which makes of wedlock the
      worst prostitution. From first to last she
       had been a victim whose innocence did but make her the easier prey.
       What had he lost?
'You need not ask me whether I am a wrecked and miserable man,' he replied, with a firmness
      equal to the Duke's. 'Society has done me a harm it can never repair; and I am yours, soul and
      body, heart, hands, and brain, if you will undertake to restore that which has been reft from
      me. I will not publish the history in this room, to men who are doubtless worthy of all
      confidence, but whose names I do not even know. If you care to receive it as a secret, I am
      willing to inform you whenever and wherever you choose. Provided only,' he concluded with a
      glance towards Ivor, 'that my friend is spared the trouble of being present.'
'Your friend,' said Ivor quietly, 'has never asked to know any man's secrets. He will
      respect yours so far as to decline knowing them.'
'Be more considerate, Ivor,' said the Duke, laying a hand on his shoulder. 'Can you not see
      that it is passion, not your friend Mr. Glanville, that speaks? Were he not thrown off his
      balance by that loss, which must yet be recent, I might be slow to credit his sincerity.
      Whereas I believe and honour it.'
Ivor hung down his head. He was ashamed of his resentment. After a few moments he came
      forward to where Rupert was seated and took his hand, which the artist, overcome by
      conflicting emotions, did not refuse. The Duke smiled, 'You have not lost everything, Mr.
      Glanville,' he said, 'while you can count on the friendship of Ivor Mardol.'

'But come,' he exclaimed after a pause, in the lighter tone which he had affected during
      dinner; 'you want to hear what has made me, the Duke of—of Adullam,' he said, smiling
      maliciously, 'a Nihilist. Can you not see for yourself?'
Rupert shook his head. He wanted the Duke to go on. Then said his Grace, 'Look at me. The
      one sufficient reason why I should detest the present order of things is that I not only was
      born great, but have had greatness thrust upon me. You ask what society has taken from me. I
      answer, a motive for exertion, an interest in life.'
'But you have enormous interests,' said Rupert.
'True; but no interest. I cannot go to seek my fortune as young heroes do in the
      story-books. I have more already than I know how to manage. If I were capable of earning a
      name in science or literature I must not attempt it. A Duke that writes verses or volumes on
      chemistry is always slightly ridiculous. Besides, I could do neither. One thing lay within my
      reach. As Leader. of the House of Commons, as a democratic Prime Minister, I might have
      governed the nation and put into effect the true principles of social order. But,' he
      concluded, laughing, 'when I was on the point of beginning, and had nearly broken up the party
      lines which have made injustice and oppression secure for the last two centuries, fate stepped
      in and insisted on my becoming a Duke and a nonentity.'
'That was hard,' observed Glanville, smiling gravely.
       'No wonder you wish to pull down the House of Lords.'
'Yes,' replied his host; 'a state of things in which a man must become a Duke, whether he
      likes it or no, is simply unreasonable. In the world of the future those only shall have
      prizes that are capable of enjoying them.'
When he had reached this point in his half-serious, half-satirical remarks, the Duke rose
      and, taking one of the guests with him, went away. Another who had been standing near in
      silence addressed Rupert, as he seemed hesitating whether to follow them or remain.
'The Duke will come back presently,' he said. And then, after a while, 'Our host finds
      pleasure in making his earnest appear like jest. But you may take for granted that no man
      living has had a more melancholy experience.'
'How so, if it is not a secret?' inquired Rupert.
'Oh, there are secrets and secrets. The history of the Duke of Adullam would be frightfully
      strange in your ears were you told merely what I know, and some others in this room. But, as
      he remarked, you have only to look at him and you can imagine what kind of secrets have made
      up his life and taken the glamour from it. He is the victim of nature as of society. The trial
      has been too much for a mere man. Consider his fascination, grace, and accomplishments. They
      would make him miserable in any station, high or low. They have given him every
       pleasure without stint; they have filled his cup to overflowing with the
      enjoyment of which others crave a single drop to intoxicate them. He has drained the goblet,
      and for him the intoxication is past. He cannot be deluded any more. Were he a great genius he
      might go on forging delusions for himself and living upon them, as we lesser mortals accept
      delusions ready made, with docility and gratitude, never asking how they came to be. The Duke,
      for his misfortune, is neither a fool nor a poet. He is clear-headed, self-controlled,
      accustomed to the childlike devices of men who come to him enamoured of his influence, and of
      women that have fallen under the spell of his enchantments. He understands the human animal
      whose governing motive is self-interest. I do not say he cannot love, but he cannot believe in
      love, and hardly in friendship. He is, therefore, very exquisite,—and very corrupt. And he
      knows it, and wonders whether in the boundless universe there may not be something which would
      cure him of his disease of realism,—an ideal the possession of which should not be fatuity,
      disappointment, and sickness of spirit.'
'You describe an old complaint,' said Rupert; 'I suppose that his private ennui has
      been endeavouring to transform itself into the pain of the world. It is a pity he has not
      something to cry for.'
'A great pity,' replied the other; 'but I do not see how he can be wounded. His most
      dreadful quality is to be invulnerable. Who was the man at
       the stake that shrieked out to the bystanders, "I cannot burn; for God's sake,
      help me to burn"?'
'Ridley or Latimer, I forget which,' answered the artist; adding, 'now I understand the Duke
      a little better. Ennui is, I daresay, the torment of the damned; and in those who
      have never felt it not likely to excite compassion.'
'I do not believe,' said Ivor, who had been sitting by all this while without a word, 'that
      the Duke was ever in love, though he may have fancied he was. He has been too much adored—a
      god enshrined above the multitude for their worship.'
'And now,' said the stranger, taking him up, 'he has got tired of them and their worship,
      and has leaped down from the altar and begun demolishing the temple.'
'It is the story of the French noblesse repeating itself,' said Rupert; 'first,
      Louis Quinze and Voltaire, then the Fourth of August.'
While they were talking, the subject of their conversation returned. He took Ivor
      affectionately by the arm and, whispering some words in his ear, seemed to be sending him
      away. Ivor left the room; and the Duke, approaching Rupert, said graciously, 'Will you come to
      my study for a moment?'
The artist bowed and followed him as he led the way through the verandah. They traversed
      several rooms, which were brilliantly lighted, and only looked the more solitary for the air
      of expectation that seemed to hang over them. Glanville as he passed
       could not forbear the tribute of an admiring glance at the paintings, statuary,
      and curious furniture with which they were adorned. The Duke's study, in comparison, was plain
      and simple, containing all the requisites, daintily mounted, of that extensive correspondence,
      much of it in cypher, which his Grace of Adullam carried on. At no time had he been indolent;
      perhaps the secret of his unhappiness lay, as he said, in the excess of energy for which he
      could find neither scope nor occasion. He motioned the artist to a chair, took one himself,
      and while the fire sparkled in front of them, turned down the lamp till only a ruddy twilight
      reigned in the room. 'Now,' he said, 'we are alone, as you desired. Ivor Mardol is not hidden
      behind the arras; and what you tell me shall sink into silence on the instant. I have received
      many a confession here, but none has gone over the threshold.'
While he had been following the Duke, Rupert's mind had not ceased to busy itself with the
      question whether he should still try to fence, or surrender, and throw himself on his
      opponent's generosity. The figure of the Jew, Bernstein, seemed to rise and mock his
      hesitation. Confide in the Duke? But that would be the same thing as confessing to Ivor. How
      could he possibly tell that they were not in collusion? Nay, the horrible thought crossed his
      mind that Hippolyta might be in that very house, hidden where he was least likely to seek her
      out. His blood turned cold as he dwelt on it. However, he was sick
       of dissembling. He did not doubt that if he chose he could go on playing his
      part as hitherto, but the recoil when the play was at an end would be terrible. Why should he
      not speak and have done with it? Were these men guilty of the abduction? Had Hippolyta
      consented to be taken away? In that case they would know already as much as he could tell
      them. He resolved to fling his cards on the table, and let them decide the contest as they
      fell. The Duke waited, without a sign of impatience. He was mild and calm, and
      imperturbable.
'If I am to say anything,' Rupert at last began, 'it must be everything. And the history is
      strange— incredible, in fact.'
'I shall not find it incredible if you tell it me,' replied the Duke.
'Well, then,' said Glanville, 'I must go back to the Hermitage at Trelingham.
'A picturesque locale ,' said the Duke of Adullam, 'as I remember it when I stayed
      with the Earl some years ago, in my Tory days. Something quaintly conceived, with the water
      and the hills round it.'
'And do you know Colonel Valence as well as the Hermitage?' inquired Rupert.
'He was not at Trelingham,' the Duke answered quietly; 'however, yes, I know him.'
'Good,' said Rupert to himself; 'now we are coming on the track. I will give him every bit
      of the chronicle, from the Madonna of San Lucar onward.' And he did so, condensing the
      narrative
       where he could, but leaving out nothing that he deemed of consequence, except
      the affection that Lady May had indulged for him, and the immediate motives connected with it
      which had induced Hippolyta to quit Falside and seek him in London. He found an admirable
      listener. When Rupert grew excited the Duke said not a word, but allowed him to recover
      himself at leisure; and when the sudden remembrance of his great loss choked his utterance and
      would not suffer him to proceed, a gentle whisper, the expression of profound and delicate
      sympathy, restored his spirits and animated him to complete the recital. Experienced as the
      Duke was in all possible combinations of passion, at certain points he displayed a keen
      interest, and even amazement. Once or twice he seemed about to interrupt the narrative; but,
      checking himself, bade Rupert, by a gesture, continue. When at length, after describing his
      return to Forrest House, the indications of Hippolyta's flight which he there came upon, and,
      in general terms, his fruitless efforts to find her, he paused and looked down, the Duke of
      Adullam only said, 'Have you Miss Valence's portrait?'
The artist gave a half smile, which was not pleasant to see, as he thought of the person to
      whom he had confided that portrait and the man who now asked him about it. He preferred
      Bernstein to have it before any Duke. But that it should be in the hands of either—!
'No,' he replied shortly; 'your Grace will have
       to draw on your memory if you desire to know what she is like.'
'I have hardly any memory,' answered the Duke, who was as quick at discovering other
      people's thoughts about him as they were in thinking them. 'I never saw her but once,' he
      continued, 'and that was some years ago, when she was a mere child. But she knows I am her
      father's sincere friend.'
For some time he sat lost in reflection, after which, turning up the lamp and looking full
      at Glanville, he said:
'Your suspicions of Ivor Mardol are absurd and unjust. I am sure that he knows nothing of
      Miss Valence. To conjecture, as you did in the first instance, that she had gone under his
      directions on a revolutionary errand was ingenious; but you should have accepted his denial.
      You have been very near losing your other self, who will be true when all the women you have
      ever cared for have turned out false.'
'But, except Ivor, she saw nobody,' returned the artist. 'What reason, unconnected with the
      movement, as he calls it, can she have had for flying in a moment from Forrest House?'
'It is idle to talk of reasons,' said the Duke, 'where a woman is concerned. Find me a
      passion, and I will unravel the knot, which at present, I confess, is insoluble. Enthusiasm—we
      want some infusion of enthusiasm to account for the madness.'
'Ah, good heavens!' groaned Rupert, 'there was no lack of enthusiasm. Hippolyta was capable
      of
       going the length of England to discover Annie Dauris, or of joining her father
      in Siberia. Do you think,' he said, with a sudden gesture, 'that she has done it? Where
       is Colonel Valence?'
'Not in Siberia yet,' returned the Duke, with a peculiar smile. 'I believe I can find him
      for you. But oh, young man,' he continued, between jest and earnest, 'how happy are you to
      feel such a human, such a natural grief and excitement! Do not be in a hurry to extinguish
      them. You are living through the most delectable chapters of your romance. You have come to
      the thrilling part where one-third is love, and another third anguish, and the last third
      uncertain hope and longing mixed in about equal proportions. Believe me, you will never live
      it through a second time. What would I not give for the despair, the active, poignant despair,
      no mere dull and chronic feeling, which I underwent in the days of my first abandonment,—not
      where I forsook, that would have been tame—but where I was forsaken? The throbbing of
      exquisite pain, the life in all its fiery ebullition, the changing dread and sudden
      palpitations of joy as the heavens above me closed or opened! That was a divine anguish. And
      will you hasten to bring in the heavy father from a side-scene, where the old man is waiting
      in hat and cloak, leaning on his absurd staff, merely that you and Miss Hippolyta may go down
      on your knees before him for his blessing, and live happy—that is to say, bored to death—ever
      after? Foolish, foolish young man.!'

The Duke in his fervour rose and paced the room, while Glanville, provoked and miserable,
      did not know whether to laugh, to storm, or to take himself out of the house. It was not long,
      however, before the eccentric peer sat down again, and resumed a little more seriously, 'But I
      perceive what I suspected to be true; you are not miserable enough to join us at this stage of
      your experience. The evil done to you may be repaired, Miss Valence may come back, and your
      discontent with social institutions will give place to an ardent desire for the delights of a
      fashionable wedding. St. George's, Hanover Square, will quite satisfy your aspirations towards
      the Ideal, and serve as your Rome and Mecca. "Journeys end in lovers' meetings, every wise
      man's son doth know." Is it not so? But he that would join us must have seen through the veil,
      and become convinced that the most solid-looking and utterly venerable institutions, from
      matrimony to the House of Lords, are cobwebs to hide the nakedness of existence. When you have
      got so far—five years, say, after your union with Miss Valence—you may knock at the door of
      our smoking-room again. Meanwhile, we will allow you to be an honorary member, and to see
      anything in which you feel an interest. As regards pains and penalties, why, you are a
      gentleman, and will keep your word to be secret about these mysteries of the nineteenth
      century. I will not even say, Vous en serez quitte pour la peur . You are not the
      sort of man to be frightened.'

Glanville heard, but he was scarcely attending. When the Duke stopped in his talk he seemed
      to wake from a reverie in which he had been plunged during the last few moments, and he said
      with decision, 'I must mention that I have seen your Grace, and I will not promise
      anything as regards Colonel Valence. Not all the fathers in the world, nor all the societies,
      shall come between me and Hippolyta.'
'Beautiful enthusiasm!' sighed the Duke; 'would that I could share in it. Were I in your
      place, knowing the disenchantments that must come by and by, I should try to believe that
      Hippolyta was divided between love for me and some other love equally strong, which made her
      existence a flame of fire like my own. Oh, you need have no scruple in mentioning your visit
      here. And it may be some time before you meet Colonel Valence. He resembles your friend Ivor
      in being as much at home with the Spartans as with the Athenians. However, I will send you
      word should he come this way.'
The conference was at an end. Returning to the salon which he had first entered,
      Rupert, after bidding farewell to the Duke, who accompanied him so far, was joined by Ivor
      Mardol. The other guests had vanished. It was brilliant starlight as they drove to the
      artist's abode, where Ivor was to take up his quarters that night. The Duke's conversation,
      sarcastic and odd though it had been, did not fail to do Rupert one good service. It almost
      persuaded him that, in suspecting Ivor, he had committed an
       injustice. His heart was not so heavy. On the other hand, his friend made no
      inquiries, did not appear to feel resentment, and spoke at intervals in his usual affectionate
      tone, remarking, with some degree of malice, on the unexpected nature of the initiation which
      Rupert had gone through. 'You were wondering when the daggers and death's-head would be
      brought in, I could see,' observed Mardol, 'and were much disappointed when the dusky page
      offered you mere pipes and tobacco.'
'I am still inclined to think it was mostly make-believe,' said Rupert. 'Nihilism is the
      fashion, and your Duke of Adullam likes playing at it.'
'Hush!' exclaimed Ivor. They were driving along the Knightsbridge Road, and sound of belated
      newsboys crying out an extraordinary edition of the evening journals came through the open
      carriage-window. 'Tell the coachman to stop; there is news.' The coachman stopped. They heard
      the word 'assassination' repeated many times. Ivor got out, caught hold of a newsboy, and held
      up the paper under the street lamp. He came running back.
'What is it?' inquired Rupert languidly. His friend sprang in, pulled up the window, and
      said in a low voice, 'They have done it at last.'
'Done what?' said the artist.
At that moment he caught the announcement distinctly which was filling the air, and he heard
      the words, again and again,'Assassination of the Emperor of Russia.'

He started in his seat, and tried in the gloom to make out his companion's face, but could
      not.
'Ivor, Ivor,' he cried, 'did you know this was going to happen? Tell me, for God's
      sake.'
'Don't ask me what I knew,' returned Ivor; 'it is unspeakable, appalling.'
There was silence in the carriage till they came within sight of Rupert's door. A ray of
      light penetrated the gloom and showed Ivor, with his face buried in his hands. He looked up,
      and said after some deliberation, 'Rupert, I am not in any way acquainted with your Colonel
      Valence. But I heard to-night that he was in Russia. If he is mixed up in this, there will
      shortly be news of him. He may escape, and he will come, as they all do, to London. If, on the
      contrary, he is captured, we shall have the photographs of the prisoners sent over to us, and
      you will be allowed to see them and discover his features, should he be among them.'
'Do you think,' said Rupert, his voice sinking to a hoarse whisper, 'that he would have
      exposed Hippolyta, his own child, to a danger like this?'
'A Nihilist has no children where the society is concerned,' replied Ivor. 'I fear from your
      description of Miss Valence that her daring and enthusiasm would have pointed her out as the
      very one to be selected for the post of danger. Anyhow, if her father is not dead or in the
      hands of the Russian police, you will soon be in the way of meeting him. I must say good-night
      here,' he went on, as the
       carriage stopped at the door, and they alighted on the pavement.
'Why,' said Rupert, 'you promised to sleep here.'
'Yes, but'—he paused and looked round—'I may be wanted at home. There will be letters,—
      visitors,—early in the morning. Oh, you need not take alarm,' he continued, seeing Rupert's
      countenance growing troubled. 'This was none of my doing. I am only an ambulance officer, one
      of the Geneva Red Cross, on the battlefield. But I ought to be at my post. Good-night, Rupert.
      Do not distrust me again. I could not bear it.'
And he hurried away. His friend took the journal which he had left, went into his study, and
      sat down to read it. The account was brief, as might be supposed, and he saw only that women,
      as well as men, were implicated. He watched and thought into the small hours of the morning;
      his mind was busy reckoning the times, possibilities, probabilities, which would throw light
      on Hippolyta's connection with the plot. He could make nothing of it all. She might have been
      there, such was his conclusion.
When the murky light of day came into the room he was watching still.

