
CHAPTER XI CHASE NOT THE RAINBOW
Again there came a pause in the writing. Thoughts and emotions from the long past
      strove within Ivor's bosom; and, leaning his head on his hand, he sat for a while in painful
      meditation. Then, taking up his pen, he went on with the story.
'The man seemed thunderstruck. He started violently, putting his hand to his heart as if he
      had been shot. "Your father and mother?" he repeated with surprise; "no, I cannot take you to
      them. When or how did it come into your head that you could have any father and mother except
      these?" and he pointed to the good old people who sat in anxious silence, waiting—as I have
      thought in later years when mediatating on the doings of that night—to be informed of things
      about which they had no more knowledge than I. The stranger turned to Mr. Mardol with a
      somewhat haughty gesture. "You do not instil into the boy," he said,
       "I am sure you do not, idle fancies of this kind. Is it his way to talk of a
      possible father and mother?" Mr. Mardol answered calmly, "I have told him that he is no child
      of mine, and there I have left the matter. Never until this evening did I hear him talk of his
      unknown parents."—"Right, right," said the stranger; "you rebuke me. I know well that you have
      dealt with Ivor wisely, and have brought him up according to our agreement." Then, falling to
      a steady perusal of my tear-stained countenance, he said in firm but gentle accents, "Ivor,
      you must put away impossible notions. To vex yourself about parents whom you have lost is
      foolish. It can bring you nothing but trouble. I am your guardian, although you have never
      seen me till now; and Mr. and Mrs. Mardol, who have taken such care of you, will give you a
      home as long as you wish to stay with them. But you are called to a task, in which the ties of
      kindred would be simply a hindrance. You know in part what I mean. You have now to learn the
      rest. Can you attend while I am talking?"
'For I stood absorbed in my disappointment, hearing every word, yet feeling that I was
      thousands of miles away, roaming in the pathless desert, and, with cries that tore the heart,
      calling on my unknown, on my dead parents, to have pity on me. I was alone, utterly,
      helplessly alone; cut off from my teacher and kind Mrs. Mardol by the sudden thrusting in of
      this new-comer, who styled himself
       my guardian, and who appeared in my childish eyes hard and unlovable. His
      question ended my reverie; he saw I was attending. Then he explained, rather as to an equal
      than a mere boy of twelve, that he wished me to interrupt my apprenticeship with Mr. Mardol,
      and to spend three, if not four, years at a public school. "Not," he continued, "at Eton or
      Harrow; I could not enable you to enter if I wished, which is not the case. But you shall go
      to a real public school, nevertheless, where you may learn Greek and Latin, and mix with
      English gentlemen."
'I was again stirred to rebellion. "What have I to do with gentlemen?" I cried. "I do not
      want to be a gentleman, but an engraver."
"'Would you not like to learn Latin and Greek?" he inquired. My answer was prompt. "Not if
      they will make me a gentleman. Mr. Ashwell"—he was an eloquent stone-mason of my acquaintance,
      great at lecturing and a man I liked to listen to—"Mr. Ashwell says that Latin and Greek train
      men to be slaves of the aristocracy, and to believe wornout lies. He says no sensible father
      would let his children learn them." At which reply I saw a gleam of pleasure on Mr. Mardol's
      wrinkled features. He was of the same opinion as my stone-mason. But the smile on the
      stranger's face was due to another feeling. I could see he was a good deal surprised. "You are
      the quickest boy I have met of your age," he went on to say; "you appear to have a genius for
      catching up what is said around you. So much the
       better. Mr. Ashwell, however, is right and wrong. The classics have become the
      studies of slaves, but they were written by free men. Do you know nothing of Plutarch's
       Lives? " I had read them all, in English, and I told him so. "Very well," he
      answered, "then you ought to understand that the classics, too, are held captive by the
      institutions which tyrannise over mankind. Not only the nations, but their history, their
      past, their very literature, must be set free and restored to its right owners. Mr. Ashwell
      speaks like the unwashed barbarian he probably is. We need men of a type less common, who
      believe in the old learning as in the latest science. You, Ivor, must be acquainted with both.
      And there are reasons why you should know what the inside of a public school is like. Will you
      go?"
"'Might I come back afterwards to learn engraving?" I would not give up what I so intensely
      delighted in. He assured me that such was his intention; when I could go on with my studies by
      myself, I should return to Mr. Mardol's workroom. If I showed no aptitude for Latin and
      Greek—but it could not be, I was too fond of modern languages, as he knew, not to feel
      interested in the ancient, which were so much nobler. The stranger talked more eloquently than
      even Mr. Ashwell; and my ear detected, in his accent and choice of words, a refinement that in
      Mr. Ashwell it would have been vain to seek. He must belong, I fancied, to the washed and
      scented revolutionists, the less common sort, whose ranks he invited me to
       join. I did not feel reluctant if, in the end, I might become an engraver. At my
      age, it is true, three or four years seemed an eternity. What might not happen in them? But I
      was told that the time would run by faster than I could imagine; that it was really almost too
      short; and that I should spend my holidays with Mr. and Mrs. Mardol. They acquiesced
      in the arrangement. And, though I shed tears at the thought of entering on a new world without
      guide or companion, what could I do but consent? The stranger was affected on leaving me. He
      said I should see him again, but not until I had spent a term at school. And so the day was
      fixed, and he went out into the freezing weather of Christmas, to his carriage, I suppose,
      round the corner. I was glad to see him go. I spent the long hours of that night in feverish
      dreaming. All I had heard or imagined during the day came back, strangely confused, in sleep.
      I seemed to find in the wilderness my long-lost parents; but while I clung about my mother's
      knees with sobbing affection, or held forth my arms to clasp a father whose face I dimly
      discerned, the vision melted, and I was standing by an open tomb, wherein lay a dreadful
      shrouded figure. Bending over it, with sardonic joy in his looks, I beheld the stranger, and,
      on beholding him, fled. Ever and anon I awoke, crying bitterly, and the pillow wet with my
      tears. The night seemed as though it would never end. Time after time, with change of scene
      and attitude, the man that called
       himself my guardian came before me as the murderer of those I held dear. His icy
      breath froze the blood in my veins; I shrank at his touch, but could neither escape nor resist
      him. His single face made my world and filled me with loathing and dismay.
'Why it should thus have affected me I cannot tell even now, when I know him so well. But
      early impressions are indelible. Mine are, at least. Mr. Felton has never done me harm; I am
      his debtor for much good. Nevertheless, to dissociate him from the visionary terror of my
      dreams that night is impossible. I admire his daring and resolution; and there are times when
      I could almost love him but for the resistance of something within. I shall not love him
      now—that is certain; the age when affection can be commanded, if ever it can, is past. On my
      gratitude, respect, and service he may count; I can offer him no more.
'My first days at school! ah me, how miserable they were! Mr. Felton's solicitor, who took
      me down from London, told me I should be homesick, but I must not mind, it would pass in a
      week or two. He little understood that the worst home-sickness is that of a child who has no
      home. If I felt lonely when Mr. and Mrs. Mardol took care of me, it was a thousand times worse
      here. I had the sense of a man with the tender heart of a child. My wretchedness was not the
      simple though piercing misery of a dog that has lost his master; it was poisoned and made
      incurable by thought. I did not in any
       way resemble the ordinary English boy, to whom leaving his parents' house is a
      trial for which, in the society of other boys, he finds compensation. I had left the whole
      world in quitting Mr. Mardol and his friends. I liked many things of which boys are
      passionately fond; but I liked, I cherished with enthusiasm, others of which these had not the
      faintest imagination. In spite of the venerable architecture, large teaching staff, solemn
      routine, and gentlemanly surroundings that gave the school a name, I felt, when I could take
      notice of it all, like a civilised man among barbarians. It was a new world, but oh, how
      inferior to the old! Let me think of it again to-night; let me recall the condemnation I
      passed on it then, lest for the sake of a beautiful face I fling myself under the dominion of
      it now.
'An unreal, a fantastic world, wilder than many dreams! Here were five hundred boys,
      trained, as Mr. Ashwell, the eloquent stone-mason, said, to be slaves of an institution and to
      believe in worn-out lies. Not that their minds received any training; it was only their
      characters that were moulded on a certain plan. I saw none with a love of learning; enthusiasm
      was not scorned, for it did not exist within the school precincts. Masters and boys were
      immersed in routine; and they had but one standard, of vague outline, but exceedingly definite
      in practice: they all aimed at being English gentlemen. This did not keep the boys from
      schoolboys' sins. They lied to their masters, and sometimes, though seldom,
       to one another; they were cruel, selfish, and spiteful; they believed in no
      religion, and they had little morality. I had been educated hitherto on such a different
      system that every day increased my astonishment. I cannot have seen things so clearly as I do
      now, or have been aware of my own reflections. But I did reflect and did pass judgment; a mind
      quickened by early contact with other minds is not slow in perceiving contrasts so great as
      that between the people I had left and the people among whom I had come. Strange as I felt to
      the ways of the place, a solitary in the crowd of eager, thoughtless boys, I observed
      incessantly what went on around me.
'I could not help looking for a friend, but it was long ere I found one. What point of
      contact was there between me and all these boys? They did not read; they could talk only of
      trivial subjects. They knew nothing of the great causes about which men were contending. They
      had never been thrown upon the current of life. Their very sins against the moral law had less
      in them of the human being than of the unreasoning animal which fulfils its desires and has
      never heard of a law. Mr. Mardol spoke to me of the True, the Good, the Beautiful, the
      greatest happiness of the greatest number, the essential sacredness of duty, the wisdom of
      obeying the higher Nature which is eternal and unchangeable. Do not say that I could not
      understand. I did understand; and the proof is that I put questions to which Mr. Mardol could
      not always find an answer. But that
       inability, so humbly confessed in the presence of a young child, did not abate
      the boundless reverence with which I listened. In my thoughts, he was the interpreter of
      Nature's laws, the Orpheus by whose song my slumbering spirit was awakened. I obeyed him with
      utter submission, and the deepest feeling of my soul was reverence.
'Here I found as little reverence as enthusiasm; a teacher that should speak of higher
      things than grammar would have been laughed at; nor do I remember on any one countenance a
      look to which in my other life I had been accustomed, manifesting the presence of the highest
      aspirations. It is a look impossible to mistake. Its absence made these men commonplace and
      the life around them dreary. I could go to none of them for comfort. They did not invite me to
      do so; they were peremptory and distant in their relations with the boys; and I should as soon
      have thought of opening my troubles to the stone lions that ramped above the main entrance as
      to these frigid pedants, whose souls were in the routine of their school and their domestic
      concerns. They remained no less strange to me when I had lived my four years under them than
      at the beginning. They were not cruel, but indifferent; not unlearned, but blind to the
      meaning of their books because so little acquainted with life; not inhuman, but quite, quite
      ignorant of the depth and scope of the word humanity. I thought them fitter to be playing
      cricket or rowing on the river than to teach others how to
       live. Reserved though I was, the extraordinary questions I sometimes put were a
      surprise and a puzzle to them. I was told to keep silence; but never did one of them stoop to
      answer me seriously. A leading article of their creed, I soon found, was that boys have no
      understanding except for their games, and a few clever ones for the lessons in the
      school-books. I learned fast, and more than one master complained he did not know what to do
      with me. Why did my guardian send me to a place where my time was wasted, and I was bidden,
      under penalties, to spend three months in learning what I knew at the end of three weeks? Of
      course he had his motives. But I went through suffering which might have been spared me. Did
      it require all those weary months to give me the true idea of an English gentleman, or to
      prove by experience that our inheritance from Rome and Athens was shamefully misused? The
      conviction was soon stamped on my mind, burnt into it, rather, as with encaustic. To make me
      more of a democrat was impossible; the trial I now went through had a different but no less
      enduring effect—(yes, Ivor, it must and shall endure)—it was for ever to hinder me from
      adopting the principles or habits of the class to which my school-fellows belonged. The wealth
      which they took for granted I renounced with passionate scorn; the intellect they despised I
      came more and more to believe in; the love of mankind, which they did not even know, I
      resolved to make the ruling principle
       of my conduct. What they called honour I saw was partly a brute instinct, partly
      the far-off reflection of Roman patriotism and Stoic virtue, by no means equal to the
      original. Did I see that at sixteen? Mr. Felton, who had a peculiar power of making me think,
      helped me to see it. What can change me?
'The boys were gentlemen in the making. With much that was agreeable, they had nothing that
      was pathetic about them. I could have liked one or another, as I might have been fond of a
      high-spirited, beautiful animal; but how different was that affection from the heart-piercing
      pity, the unbounded tenderness, I had felt at the sight of my poor little neighbours,
      —children of my own age or younger, living on stinted fare, without amusements, without green
      fields or flowers, shivering in the cold, and trembling when the dark night came on because
      they had only one another's company in the lonesome street,—forlorn, unfriended creatures, the
      recollection of whom makes my heart bleed even while I write, and tells me that this love
      trouble of mine is trifling indeed compared with the anguish that nightly haunts our cities.
      Be still, be still, spirit of compassion! I will serve, I am serving in the army of the poor.
      Do not blind me with tears until I have written the memories that are to save me from
      degradation, from moral ruin.
'No, there was none to share my thoughts. I made so-called friends. I was not insulted, nor
      was any special injustice dealt out to me. I played and laughed, and was on good terms with
      most of my
       companions, and learned to speak as they did, lightly or unfeelingly as the
      occasion required. I never forgot that I was distinct from them in origin, belief, profession,
      porspect, disposition,—in everything that may make one human being unlike another. The
      ingrained conviction that these boys were heirs of injustice helped me; so did their quiet
      assumption that the world belonged to them; so did the tone in which they implied that to be
      low-born and base were the same thing; so, above all, did the frequent return to my old
      teacher and Mrs. Mardol when the holidays came for which I yearned. At the close of a dismal
      term I saw with fresh and ever-growing delight the familiar workroom, and handled the burin
      once more.
'The time would not pass quickly. I counted all the days and all their hours, gaining relief
      only from my books, in which were things high and heroic, if I could have been taught them by
      men who had felt the heroism or aspired to the height. My evenings, too, when I could be
      alone, were spent in a pleasant occupation; for I did not lay aside my pencil. But I must have
      broken down in health and spirits, or pleaded for release from captivity, but for one thing.
      Rupert came to be my friend. Rupert, not quite my own age, with his bright looks, ardent
      feelings, quick impulsive ways,—Rupert, versatile, affectionate, capable of anger and so ready
      to forgive and forget, sensitive, engaging,—what a change passed over my solitary life when he
      grew to be a part of it, when his sunshine brought out in the gray wintry landscape
       all manner of unexpected colouring, warm tints, and comfortable cheering
      prospects! It was the love of drawing that occasioned our friendship; but I should always have
      worshipped him, though in silence, for his nature, how different soever from mine, was
      essentially that of the artist.
'Until I became the confidant of his thoughts I had never known what a light, ethereal
      creation the human spirit may be. I seemed to find in him, young as he was, the ideal charm
      which is revealed in the Greek statuary, as in the noble unaffected verse which corresponds to
      it in the Greek tragedians. The friezes of the Parthenon were known to me from the earliest I
      can remember. My master often took me to see them. He taught me how to admire their
      unparalleled perfection; for, much as he dreaded the influence of the classic training, he
      neither ignored nor misunderstood the greatness of antique art. He was a true artist himself,
      transferring a picture with astonishing insight and accuracy from canvas to steel or wood. The
      Greek poets I was beginning to read of my own accord, for I would not wait until these
      indolent guides gave the signal. Thus, in a moment, spring burst upon me out of the heart of
      winter, the world grew white with blossom, the soft rains fell with music and light in them on
      the tender meadow grass—truly meadow-sweet, and enamelled in pearly dews to my young vision.
      Friendship, art, poetry, all the Graces came, and with them hours of pleasant musing, of
      endless converse, of laughter and passionate
       delight, and a love I could in no way express, yet was ever expressing. Rupert
      was my first, my only friend; and how fond he was of me! We quarrelled, not often, but yet we
      did quarrel; for, if I was patient, I could also be vexed, and he was headlong and impetuous.
      How vehement were our disputes, how full of anguish our estrangement, how proud we were in
      demeanour, and how deeply pierced within! Such quarrels were like thunderstorms—violent,
      allthreatening. Then a little word, a look, a hand stretched out, broke the spell; not a cloud
      but rolled away below the horizon, and all the air was sweet and fresh, with the singing of
      nightingales in every covert, and strange new flowers springing about our steps.
'Only a boy's friendship? Ah, golden hours, full of life and wonder, when, like virgin-snow,
      the unsullied feelings took on them rosy tints, and sparkled and shone pure and bright under
      the great sun as it rose into the heavens!
'I had known what it was to pity children,—that serious, thoughtful tenderness, which seems
      to befit old age, not boyhood,—but never until now had I imagined a love surpassing pity, made
      up of worship and delight, of joy and absolute surrender, of exquisite satisfaction and new
      desires. I was beginning my acquaintance with the Old Testament, which at Mr. Mardol's I had
      not thought of looking into. How often I dwelt upon the one verse that, giving back this fresh
      experience, as in a looking-glass, was to me a reflection of the eternal truth! "And it came
      to pass,"
       said the story, "when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul, that the soul of
      Jonathan was knit with the soul of David; and Jonathan loved him as his own soul." I would
      think of him often as David, sometimes call him by that name. For he too was ruddy and of a
      fair countenance. He could do nothing that was not perfect; I loved the least trifle that his
      hand had touched, finding a pleasure not only in his presence, but in having near me any sign
      that he would come again. In every friendship, says the proverb, one loves and one suffers
      himself to be loved. In our friendship I was the lover. I asked only such a return as the god
      makes to his worshipper, something tender and protecting, and, above all, leave to express my
      devotion. It is so long ago. Our regard has in nothing diminished, but the charm of its
      springtide could not last. It has yielded to a more energetic feeling, which seems to me the
      abiding element of manhood, and a constituent of all our passion when youth is gone. The
      fresh, wet colour, innocent but warm, has now a deeper tone, a more enduring consistency; it
      is fixed and will not fade. The hues of spring are not eternal, but its life is; and summer
      and harvest do but unfold it to perfection. And yet, and yet,—ah, golden hours, what would I
      not give for a single one of them, that hour of reconciliation when our nightingales were
      singing in every brake!
'All too quickly now did the days fleet on, as they swept down the river of time. I counted
      them for
       the pleasure they had yet in store. Rupert, like myself, was an orphan; he did
      not spend the holidays at home, but either in his guardian's family or with friends to whom he
      was always welcome. With the courtesy of his class, he put no questions as to whence I came. I
      gave him to understand that I had lost my parents; that my name was not my own; and that I was
      not going to a university like most of our companions, or, like himself, on the Continent to
      study. He never said, "What, then, do you propose to do?" But he entreated me to take him for
      my brother in heart and soul. I promised, and I have kept my promise. The strange thing was
      that I loved him so well, and felt in such a heavenly new world when he was by, that I did not
      remember one of the controverted points on which I ought to have examined him. I did not ask
      him to accept Democracy, or vegetarianism (which latter, from necessity, I had been compelled
      at school to surrender), or the hatred of city-life, or the worship of Nature. He was gentle
      to every one; he could not be hard-hearted when he stooped to care for me. But I thought
      neither of my old associates nor of the questions they were agitating as I looked at his dear
      face and walked by his side. Long after I came upon the magnificent saying of Novalis, "Were
      there only two lovers in the universe," and so on. How deep it went into me! I remembered the
      time when, for Rupert and me, there were only two lovers—we two, in all the world,
      and we wandered as in a happy
       dream. Life could have no problems for us; we desired nothing save that our
      dream might never end. Does the secret of regeneration lie there for these half-dead
      institutions? Is love the last word in the development of the race, as it surely is in that of
      the individual? But men do not understand. They have so little inspiration, so universal a
      sense of distrust. They are cautious, and therefore cold. They pretend to be guided by
      justice, by an abstract formal balancing of mine and thine, which speedily becomes injustice
      when the stronger holds the scales. The universal makeweight, I perceive, is the sword of
      Brennus.
'I went home, but thought day and night of my friend. I worked easily and spoke with less
      shyness than before; and my secret thoughts were altered. The longing for father and mother,
      though unappeased, was dormant. I knew it might stir when my last term had ended and I had
      bidden Rupert farewell. Neither would I mind the great problems in which I had taken such
      interest. Time enough, I said, when Rupert is away. Mr. Felton observed the change, questioned
      me, looked over a letter of my friend's which he asked me to show him, and with a grave smile
      asked me what I knew of the boy's position. I knew very little, except that he was of good
      birth, that his parents were dead, and that he meant to be a painter. All this I repeated;
      but, in my own mind, Rupert was the being I loved, who had no antecedents and no place in this
      lower realm;
       he came to me out of heaven. What else he might be I neither knew nor cared. Mr.
      Felton let me alone. He saw how it was, and would not come between me and my first
      friendship.
'I can see now that the experiment of school had its dangers. However, it succeeded. Much as
      I loved Rupert, I was not tempted to prefer the English gentleman's view of things either to
      Plutarch or to Plato. These boys were Macedonians, not Greeks. It might have been difficult to
      climb from their level to the higher doctrines; but the only change for me would have been a
      descent, and that in the region of the intellect I hold to be impossible. I am yet convinced
      that English life is founded on chimæras. Its rank, respectability, wealth, and religion are
      phantoms, not realities. Mr. Mardol, who had none of these, was superior beyond comparison to
      the teachers at whose feet I was sitting. For I was astonished, and have since been amused, on
      finding that Mr. Mardol applied a religious standard, and made me do so too, where these
      nominal Christians dreamt only of their conventions. At school I kept my feelings on this and
      the like matters to myself; even Rupert did not know them. The conformity expected of me was
      by no means troublesome. Nobody asked whether I thought of eternal realities, or believed in
      them. I went to chapel like the rest; unlike the rest, I listened to sermons which, in their
      complacent dulness had a grotesque charm for one to whom the manliest popular speaking in
      London
       was accessible and long had been so. I was much too young to analyse, but
      perfectly capable of feeling the difference. I heard the preacher in the pulpit tamely
      rehearse, for the hundredth time, a gospel which was not so real to him as to me were the
      figures of the heathen mythology in his everyday lessons. I knew the poetical worth and
      grandeur of Apollo; he did not know the historical worth or grandeur of his Christ. Therefore,
      he droned out a burden of so-called saving articles and went his way, satisfied to have spoken
      what he had spoken before, any time these twenty years. Of religion he knew nothing. On the
      other hand, my friend Mr. Ashwell, the eloquent stone-mason, rugged as he was in speech and
      bearing, insisted on a creed for which he would have laid down his life, or taken that of any
      preacher —a creed which absorbed his being and filled his daily thoughts, shining out to him
      as the certain salvation of mankind. Now, Mr. Ashwell did not stand alone. I knew a multitude
      of others, equally convinced and eager to spread their teaching, though not so eloquent. The
      old religion, as seen at school, seemed to me an effete babbler on Sundays, and no better than
      a forgotten corpse the rest of the week.'
'But, Ivor, you reason more than enough. Go on with your story. You left school as you came,
      a revolutionist; you corresponded with Rupert; you saw Mr. Felton once in a way and satisfied
      him that you were striving to unite the noble past of mankind with as noble a future; you
      earned your bread
       honestly, and repaid Mr. and Mrs. Mardol's affection by tending them in their
      old days and closing their eyes when the hour struck. You laboured in the cause, and did not
      abandon it in the pursuit of worldly phantoms; you fell in love neither with rank, nor with
      riches, nor with respectability. You were loyal and true until a certain morning, when, as you
      gazed foolishly into a beautiful face, your beliefs and principles melted like frostwork in
      the sun; and you fell in love with Lady May Davenant.'
'Ah, spare me, stern monitor! I will confess and have done with it. Yes, it is too true.
      Convinced that I had nothing to fear from love, that Rupert's friendship left no room for it,
      I came into the neighbourhood of fire and was scorched before I knew. Pity and pardon my
      inexperience. How could I anticipate that feelings which had never shown a sign of existence
      would leap out of the soil, full-armed and mature, at the glance of a woman which meant
      nothing for me and yet was infinitely captivating? But is it not shameful that I waited to
      catch the plague until I had left my work-a-day world and was admitted within this high-born
      circle? Could I never, then, have fallen in love with a mechanic's daughter? I never did, nor
      thought of such a thing. It is only, I suppose, King Cophetua that weds the beggar maid, not a
      man whose rank is about equal to her father's. I have seen beautiful, though ragged, damsels
      in the haunts of the poor; could I have asked one of them to share my affection? Not I.
       Cophetua had a greater mind than the engraver's apprentice. Or was it that I
      sought a companion who would understand me and be my radiant polar star in what I dreamt of
      achieving? That may be the explanation. May Davenant has, I think, the heart of a woman and
      the mind of a man. I like her resolute bearing, the proud carriage of her body and
      straightforward look, the cordial grasp of her hand. Then how abashed she can suddenly seem,
      eyes cast down and the colour mounting, as if in the midst of her imperious strength she
      remembered that she was a maiden and therefore needed a stronger arm. I beheld in her a
      highly-cultivated yet unspoilt nature, the finest breeding combined with as fine a play of
      impulse and passion,—no wonder I began to think there might be happiness in love. Let it serve
      for my exculpation. No, she would not dream of marrying beneath her, as the world calls it.
      For me she cares not at all. When I talk she looks at me with undaunted eyes; it is only while
      she is talking herself, or Lord Trelingham interposes, or Rupert throws in a hasty word, that
      the fit of blushing comes upon her. To indulge an affection like this would be chasing the
      rainbow. It may be difficult to renounce; but, Ivor, confess that it is impossible to attain.
      Some other man will appear to make her happy, if he has not come already. Her gratitude for
      the restoration of the canvas may give you a place in her memory among carpenters and
      drawing-masters. You will bid the Hermitage farewell,
       go back to the mighty prison of London, live where no great lady comes or would
      venture her dainty footstep, and find in Rupert all the joy that affection is to bestow on
      you. Good-bye, Lady May; the rainbow has melted into mist.'
He flung down his pen, and once more, walking to the window, drew the curtains. As he did so
      a flood of light came into the room. He had been writing many hours; he was cold and stiff;
      and the morning, with its steely clearness wherein there seemed neither the warmth of sunshine
      nor the solemn brilliancy of the stars, chilled him yet more. He turned to the hearth where,
      when he began to write, the fire was blazing. A heap of white ashes lay in the fender, and not
      a spark glowed among them. 'The fire is out,' he said to himself with a mocking smile, 'and so
      is my love for May Davenant. Each has done its work. What more do I want?' And his thoughts
      went back to the solemn words whispered as he stood face to face with the stars at midnight.
      'What is love but a handful of dry heather, set on fire and cast into the waters of death.' He
      would not live for it; he must aim at the larger good of immortality which, transcending
      passion, in some unknown way realises perfection.

