<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>CHAPTER IX <t:hi>HOLIDAYS</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>I <t:hi>have</t:hi> said that Ellen had a child by her first husband.  Marie, for that was her
     name, was now ten years old.  She was like neither her mother nor father, and yet was
      <t:hi>shot</t:hi> as it were with strange gleams which reminded me of her paternal grandmother for
     a moment, and then disappeared.  She had rather coarse dark hair, small black eyes, round face,
     and features somewhat blunt or blurred, the nose in particular being so.  She had a tendency to
     be stout.  For books she did not care, and it was with the greatest difficulty we taught her to
     read.  She was not orderly or careful about her person, and in this respect was a sore
     disappointment—not that she was positively careless, but she took no pride in dress, nor in
     keeping her room and her wardrobe neat.  She was fond of bright colours, which was another
     trial to Ellen, who disliked any approach to gaudiness.  She was not by any means a fool, and
     she had a peculiarly swift mode of expressing herself upon persons and things.  A stranger
     looking at her would perhaps have adjudged her inclined to sensuousness, and dull.  She was
     neither one nor the other.  She ate little, although she was fond of sweets.  Her rather heavy
     face, with no clearly cut outline in it, was not the typical face for passion; but she was
     capable of passion to an extraordinary degree, and what is more remarkable, it was not
     explosive passion, or rather it was not passion which she suffered to explode.  I remember once
     when she was a little mite she was asked out somewhere to tea.  She was dressed and ready, but
     it began to rain fast, and she was told she could not go.  She besought, but it was in vain. 
     We could not afford cabs, and there was no omnibus.  Marie, finding all her entreaties were
     useless, quietly walked out of the room; and after some little time her mother, calling her and
     finding she did not come, went to look for her.  She had gone into the back-yard, and was
     sitting there in the rain by the side of the water-butt.  She was soaked, and her best clothes
     were spoiled.  I must confess that I did not take very kindly to her.  I was irritated at her
     slowness in learning; it was, in fact, painful to be obliged to teach her.  I thought that
     perhaps she might have some undeveloped taste for music, but she showed none, and our attempts
     to get her to sing ordinary melodies were a failure.  She was more or less of a locked cabinet
     to me.  I tried her with the two or three keys which I had, but finding that none of them
     fitted, I took no more pains about her.</t:p>
<t:p>One Sunday we determined upon a holiday.  It was a bold adventure for us, but we had made up
     our minds.  There was an excursion train to Hastings, and accordingly Ellen, Marie, and myself
     were at London Bridge Station early in the morning.  It was a lovely summer’s day in mid-July. 
     The journey down was uncomfortable enough in consequence of the heat and dust, but we heeded
     neither one nor the other in the hope of seeing the sea.  We reached Hastings at about eleven
     o’clock, and strolled westwards towards Bexhill.  Our pleasure was exquisite.  Who can tell,
     save the imprisoned Londoner, the joy of walking on the clean sea-sand!  What a delight that
     was, to say nothing of the beauty of the scenery!  To be free of the litter and filth of a
     London suburb, of its broken hedges, its brickbats, its torn advertisements, its worn and
     trampled grass in fields half given over to the speculative builder: in place of this, to tread
     the immaculate shore over which breathed a wind not charged with soot; to replace the dull,
     shrouding obscurity of the smoke by a distance so distinct that the masts of the ships whose
     hulls were buried below the horizon were visible—all this was perfect bliss.  It was not very
     poetic bliss, perhaps; but nevertheless it is a fact that the cleanness of the sea and the sea
     air was as attractive to us as any of the sea attributes.  We had a wonderful time.  Only in
     the country is it possible to note the change of morning into mid-day, of mid-day into
     afternoon, and of afternoon into evening; and it is only in the country, therefore, that a day
     seems stretched out into its proper length.  We had brought all our food with us, and sat upon
     the shore in the shadow of a piece of the cliff.  A row of heavy white clouds lay along the
     horizon almost unchangeable and immovable, with their summit-lines and the part of the mass
     just below them steeped in sunlight.  The level opaline water differed only from a floor by a
     scarcely perceptible heaving motion, which broke into the faintest of ripples at our feet.  So
     still was the great ocean, so quietly did everything lie in it, that the wavelets which licked
     the beach were as pure and bright as if they were a part of the mid-ocean depths.  About a mile
     from us, at one o’clock, a long row of porpoises appeared, showing themselves in graceful
     curves for half-an-hour or so, till they went out farther to sea off Fairlight.  Some
     fishing-boats were becalmed just in front of us.  Their shadows slept, or almost slept, upon
     the water, a gentle quivering alone showing that it was not complete sleep, or if sleep, that
     it was sleep with dreams.  The intensity of the sunlight sharpened the outlines of every little
     piece of rock, and of the pebbles, in a manner which seemed supernatural to us Londoners.  In
     London we get the heat of the sun, but not his light, and the separation of individual parts
     into such vivid isolation was so surprising that even Marie noticed it, and said it “all seemed
     as if she were looking through a glass.”  It was perfect—perfect in its beauty—and perfect
     because, from the sun in the heavens down to the fly with burnished wings on the hot rock,
     there was nothing out of harmony.  Everything breathed one spirit.  Marie played near us; Ellen
     and I sat still, doing nothing.  We wanted nothing, we had nothing to achieve; there were no
     curiosities to be seen, there was no particular place to be reached, no “plan of operations,”
     and London was forgotten for the time.  It lay behind us in the north-west, and the cliff was
     at the back of us shutting out all thought of it.  No reminiscences and no anticipations
     disturbed us; the present was sufficient, and occupied us totally.</t:p>
<t:p>I should like, if I could, to write an essay upon the art of enjoying a holiday.  It is sad
     to think how few people know how to enjoy one, although they are so precious.  We do not
     sufficiently consider that enjoyment of every kind is an art carefully to be learnt, and
     specially the art of making the most of a brief space set apart for pleasure.  It is foolish,
     for example, if a man, city bred, has but twelve hours before him, to spend more of it in
     eating and drinking than is necessary.  Eating and drinking produce stupidity, at least in some
     degree, which may just as well be reserved for town.  It is foolish also to load the twelve
     hours with a task—so much to be done.  The sick person may perhaps want exercise, but to the
     tolerably healthy the best of all recreation is the freedom from fetters even when they are
     self-imposed.</t:p>
<t:p>Our train homewards was due at Bexhill a little after seven.  By five o’clock a change
     gradual but swift was observed.  The clouds which had charmed us all through the morning and
     afternoon were in reality thunder-clouds, which woke up like a surprised army under perfect
     discipline, and moved magnificently towards us.  Already afar off we heard the softened echoing
     roll of the thunder.  Every now and then we saw a sharp thrust of lightning down into the
     water, and shuddered when we thought that perhaps underneath that stab there might be a ship
     with living men.  The battle at first was at such a distance that we watched it with intense
     and solemn delight.  As yet not a breath of air stirred, but presently, over in the south-east,
     a dark ruffled patch appeared on the horizon, and we agreed that it was time to go.  The
     indistinguishable continuous growl now became articulated into distinct crashes.  I had
     miscalculated the distance to the station, and before we got there the rain, skirmishing in
     advance, was upon us.  We took shelter in a cottage for a moment in order that Ellen might get
     a glass of water—bad-looking stuff it was, but she was very thirsty—and put on her cloak.  We
     then started again on our way.  We reached the station at about half-past six, before the
     thunder was overhead, but not before Ellen had got wet, despite all my efforts to protect her. 
     She was also very hot from hurrying, and yet there was nothing to be done but to sit in a kind
     of covered shed till the train came up.  The thunder and lightning were, however, so
     tremendous, that we thought of nothing else.  When they were at their worst, the lightning
     looked like the upset of a cauldron of white glowing metal—with such strength, breadth, and
     volume did it descend.  Just as the train arrived, the roar began to abate, and in about
     half-an-hour it had passed over to the north, leaving behind the rain, cold and continuous,
     which fell all round us from a dark, heavy, grey sky.  The carnage in which we were was a
     third-class, with seats arranged parallel to the sides.  It was crowded, and we were obliged to
     sit in the middle, exposed to the draught which the tobacco smoke made necessary.  Some of the
     company were noisy, and before we got to Red Hill became noisier, as the brandy-flasks which
     had been well filled at Hastings began to work.  Many were drenched, and this was an excuse for
     much of the drinking; although for that matter, any excuse or none is generally sufficient.  At
     Red Hill we were stopped by other trains, and before we came to Croydon we were an hour late. 
     We had now become intolerably weary.  The songs were disgusting, and some of the women who were
     with the men had also been drinking, and behaved in a manner which it was not pleasant that
     Ellen and Marie should see.  The carriage was lighted fortunately by one dim lamp only which
     hung in the middle, and I succeeded at last in getting seats at the further end, where there
     was a knot of more decent persons who had huddled up there away from the others.  All the glory
     of the morning was forgotten.  Instead of three happy, exalted creatures, we were three
     dejected, shivering mortals, half poisoned with foul air and the smell of spirits.  We crawled
     up to London Bridge at the slowest pace, and, finally, the railway company discharged us on the
     platform at ten minutes past eleven.  Not a place in any omnibus could be secured, and we
     therefore walked for a mile or so till I saw a cab, which—unheard-of expense for me—I engaged,
     and we were landed at our own house exactly at half-past twelve.  The first thing to be done
     was to get Marie to bed.  She was instantly asleep, and was none the worse for her journey. 
     With Ellen the case was different.  She could not sleep, and the next morning was feverish. 
     She insisted that it was nothing more than a bad cold, and would on no account permit me even
     to give her any medicine.  She would get up presently, and she and Marie could get on well
     enough together.  But when I reached home on Monday evening, Ellen was worse, and was still in
     bed.</t:p>
<t:p>I sent at once for the doctor, who would give no opinion for a day or two, but meanwhile
     directed that she was to remain where she was, and take nothing but the lightest food.  Tuesday
     night passed, and the fever still increased.  I had become very anxious, but I dared not stay
     with her, for I knew not what might happen if I were absent from my work.  I was obliged to try
     and think of somebody who would come and help us.  Our friend Taylor, who once was the
     coal-porter at Somerset House, came into my mind.  He, as I have said when talking about him,
     was married, but had no children.  To him accordingly I went.  I never shall forget the
     alacrity with which he prompted his wife to go, and with which she consented.  I was shut up in
     my own sufferings, but I remember a flash of joy that all our efforts in our room had not been
     in vain.  I was delighted that I had secured assistance, but I do believe the uppermost thought
     was delight that we had been able to develop gratitude and affection.  Mrs. Taylor was an
     “ordinary woman.”  She was about fifty, rather stout, and entirely uneducated.  But when she
     took charge at our house, all her best qualities found expression.  It is true enough,
      <t:hi>omnium consensu capax imperii nisi imperasset</t:hi>, but it is equally true that under the
     pressure of trial and responsibility we are often stronger than when there is no pressure. 
     Many a man will acknowledge that in difficulty he has surprised himself by a resource and
     coolness which he never suspected before.  Mrs. Taylor I always thought to be rather weak and
     untrustworthy, but I found that when <t:hi>weight</t:hi> was placed upon her, she was steady as a
     rock, a systematic and a perfect manager.  There was no doubt in a very short time as to the
     nature of the disease.  It was typhoid fever, the cause probably being the impure water drunk
     as we were coming home.  I have no mind to describe what Ellen suffered.  Suffice it to say,
     that her treatment was soon reduced to watching her every minute night and day, and
     administering small quantities of milk.  Her prostration and emaciation were excessive, and
     without the most constant attention she might at any moment have slipped out of our hands.  I
     was like a man shipwrecked and alone in a polar country, whose existence depends upon one spark
     of fire, which he tries to cherish, left glimmering in a handful of ashes.  Oh those days,
     prolonged to weeks, during which that dreadful struggle lasted—days swallowed up with one sole,
     intense, hungry desire that her life might be spared!—days filled with a forecast of the
     blackness and despair before me if she should depart.  I tried to obtain release from the
     office.  The answer was that nobody could of course prevent my being away, but that it was not
     usual for a clerk to be absent merely because his wife was not well.  The brute added with a
     sneer that a wife was “a luxury” which he should have thought I could hardly afford.  We
     divided between us, however, at home the twenty-four hours during which we stood sentinels
     against death, and occasionally we were relieved by one or two friends.  I went on duty from
     about eight in the evening till one in the morning, and was then relieved by Mrs. Taylor, who
     remained till ten or eleven.  She then went to bed, and was replaced by little Marie.  What a
     change came over that child!  I was amazed at her.  All at once she seemed to have found what
     she was born to do.  The key had been discovered, which unlocked and revealed what there was in
     her, of which hitherto I had been altogether unaware.  Although she was so little, she became a
     perfect nurse.  Her levity disappeared; she was grave as a matron, moved about as if shod in
     felt, never forgot a single direction, and gave proper and womanly answers to strangers who
     called.  Faculties unsuspected grew almost to full height in a single day.  Never did she relax
     during the whole of that dreadful time, or show the slightest sign of discontent.  She sat by
     her mother’s side, intent, vigilant; and she had her little dinner prepared and taken up into
     the sickroom by Mrs. Taylor before she went to bed.  I remember once going to her cot in the
     night, as she lay asleep, and almost breaking my heart over her with remorse and
     thankfulness—remorse, that I, with blundering stupidity, had judged her so superficially; and
     thankfulness, that it had pleased God to present to me so much of His own divinest grace.  Fool
     that I was, not to be aware that messages from Him are not to be read through the envelope in
     which they are enclosed.  I never should have believed, if it had not been for Marie, that any
     grown-up man could so love a child.  Such love, I should have said, was only possible between
     man and woman, or, perhaps, between man and man.  But now I doubt whether a love of that
     particular kind could be felt towards any grown-up human being, love so pure, so imperious, so
     awful.  My love to Marie was love of God Himself as He is—an unrestrained adoration of an
     efflux from Him, adoration transfigured into love, because the revelation had clothed itself
     with a child’s form.  It was, as I say, the love of God as He is.  It was not necessary, as it
     so often is necessary, to qualify, to subtract, to consider the other side, to deplore the
     obscurity or the earthly contamination with which the Word is delivered to us.  This was the
     Word itself, without even consciousness on the part of the instrument selected for its
     vocalisation.  I may appear extravagant, but I can only put down what I felt and still feel.  I
     appeal, moreover, to Jesus Himself for justification.  I had seen the kingdom of God through a
     little child.  I, in fact, have done nothing more than beat out over a page in my own words
     what passed through His mind when He called a little child and set him in the midst of His
     disciples.  How I see the meaning of those words now! and so it is that a text will be with us
     for half a lifetime, recognised as great and good, but not penetrated till the experience comes
     round to us in which it was born.</t:p>
<t:p>Six weeks passed before the faint blue point of light which flickered on the wick began to
     turn white and show some strength.  At last, however, day by day, we marked a slight accession
     of vitality which increased with change of diet.  Every evening when I came home I was
     gladdened by the tidings which showed advance, and Ellen, I believe, was as much pleased to see
     how others rejoiced over her recovery as she was pleased for her own sake.  She, too, was one
     of those creatures who always generously admit improvement.  For my own part, I have often
     noticed that when I have been ill, and have been getting better, I have refused to acknowledge
     it, and that it has been an effort to me to say that things were not at their worst.  She,
     however, had none of this niggardly baseness, and always, if only for the sake of her friends,
     took the cheerful side.  Mrs. Taylor now left us.  She left us a friend whose friendship will
     last, I hope, as long as life lasts.  She had seen all our troubles and our poverty: we knew
     that she knew all about us: she had helped us with the most precious help—what more was there
     necessary to knit her to us?—and it is worth noting that the assistance which she rendered, and
     her noble self-sacrifice, so far from putting us, in her opinion, in her debt, only seemed to
     her a reason why she should be more deeply attached to us.</t:p>
<t:p>It was late in the autumn before Ellen had thoroughly recovered, but at last we said that she
     was as strong as she was before, and we determined to celebrate our deliverance by one more
     holiday before the cold weather came.  It was again Sunday—a perfectly still, warm, autumnal
     day, with a high barometer and the gentlest of airs from the west.  The morning in London was
     foggy, so much so that we doubted at first whether we should go; but my long experience of
     London fog told me that we should escape from it with that wind if we got to the chalk downs
     away out by Letherhead and Guildford.  We took the early train to a point at the base of the
     hills, and wound our way up into the woods at the top.  We were beyond the smoke, which rested
     like a low black cloud over the city in the north-east, reaching a third of the way up to the
     zenith.  The beech had changed colour, and glowed with reddish-brown fire.  We sat down on a
     floor made of the leaves of last year.  At mid-day the stillness was profound, broken only by
     the softest of whispers descending from the great trees which spread over us their protecting
     arms.  Every now and then it died down almost to nothing, and then slowly swelled and died
     again, as if the Gods of the place were engaged in divine and harmonious talk.  By moving a
     little towards the external edge of our canopy we beheld the plain all spread out before us,
     bounded by the heights of Sussex and Hampshire.  It was veiled with the most tender blue, and
     above it was spread a sky which was white on the horizon and deepened by degrees into azure
     over our heads.  The exhilaration of the air satisfied Marie, although she had no playmate, and
     there was nothing special with which she could amuse herself.  She wandered about looking for
     flowers and ferns, and was content.  We were all completely happy.  We strained our eyes to see
     the furthest point before us, and we tried to find it on the map we had brought with us.  The
     season of the year, which is usually supposed to make men pensive, had no such effect upon us. 
     Everything in the future, even the winter in London, was painted by Hope, and the death of the
     summer brought no sadness.  Rather did summer dying in such fashion fill our hearts with
     repose, and even more than repose—with actual joy.</t:p>
<t:milestone unit="subchapter"/>
<t:p>Here ends the autobiography.  A month after this last holiday my friend was dead and buried. 
     He had unsuspected disease of the heart, and one day his master, of whom we have heard
     something, was more than usually violent.  Mark, as his custom was, was silent, but evidently
     greatly excited.  His tyrant left the room; and in a few minutes afterwards Mark was seen to
     turn white and fall forward in his chair.  It was all over!  His body was taken to a hospital
     and thence sent home.  The next morning his salary up to the day of his death came in an
     envelope to his widow, without a single word from his employers save a request for
     acknowledgment.  Towards mid-day, his office coat, and a book found in his drawer, arrived in a
     brown paper parcel, carriage unpaid.</t:p>
<t:p>On looking over his papers, I found the sketch of his life and a mass of odds and ends, some
     apparently written for publication.  Many of these had evidently been in envelopes, and had
     most likely, therefore, been offered to editors or publishers, but all, I am sure, had been
     refused.  I add one or two by way of appendix, and hope they will be thought worth saving.</t:p>
<t:p>R. S.</t:p>
</t:div>