<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>CHAPTER I <t:hi>NEWSPAPERS</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>When I had established myself in my new lodgings in Camden Town, I found I had ten
     pounds in my pocket, and again there was no outlook.  I examined carefully every possibility. 
     At last I remembered that a relative of mine, who held some office in the House of Commons,
     added to his income by writing descriptive accounts of the debates, throwing in by way of
     supplement any stray scraps of gossip which he was enabled to collect.  The rules of the House
     as to the admission of strangers were not so strict then as they are now, and he assured me
     that if I could but secure a commission from a newspaper, he could pass me into one of the
     galleries, and, when there was nothing to be heard worth describing, I could remain in the
     lobby, where I should by degrees find many opportunities of picking up intelligence which would
     pay.  So far, so good; but how to obtain the commission?  I managed to get hold of a list of
     all the country papers, and I wrote to nearly every one, offering my services.  I am afraid
     that I somewhat exaggerated them, for I had two answers, and, after a little correspondence,
     two engagements.  This was an unexpected stroke of luck; but alas! both journals circulated in
     the same district.  I never could get together more stuff than would fill about a column and a
     half, and consequently I was obliged, with infinite pains, to vary, so that it could not be
     recognised, the form of what, at bottom, was essentially the same matter.  This was work which
     would have been disagreeable enough, if I had not now ceased in a great measure to demand what
     was agreeable.  In years past I coveted a life, not of mere sensual enjoyment—for that I never
     cared—but a life which should be filled with activities of the noblest kind, and it was
     intolerable to me to reflect that all my waking hours were in the main passed in merest
     drudgery, and that only for a few moments at the beginning or end of the day could it be said
     that the higher sympathies were really operative.  Existence to me was nothing but these few
     moments, and consequently flitted like a shadow.  I was now, however, the better of what was
     half disease and half something healthy and good.  In the first place, I had discovered that my
     appetite was far larger than my powers.  Consumed by a longing for continuous intercourse with
     the best, I had no ability whatever to maintain it, and I had accepted as a fact, however
     mysterious it might be, that the human mind is created with the impulses of a seraph and the
     strength of a man.  Furthermore, what was I that I should demand exceptional treatment? 
     Thousands of men and women superior to myself, are condemned, if that is the proper word to
     use, to almost total absence from themselves.  The roar of the world for them is never lulled
     to rest, nor can silence ever be secured in which the voice of the Divine can be heard.</t:p>
<t:p>My letters were written twice a week, and as each contained a column and a half, I had six
     columns weekly to manufacture.  These I was in the habit of writing in the morning, my evenings
     being spent at the House.  At first I was rather interested, but after a while the occupation
     became tedious beyond measure, and for this reason.  In a discussion of any importance about
     fifty members perhaps would take part, and had made up their minds beforehand to speak.  There
     could not possibly be more than three or four reasons for or against the motion, and as the
     knowledge that what the intending orator had to urge had been urged a dozen times before on
     that very night never deterred him from urging it again, the same arguments, diluted, muddled,
     and mispresented, recurred with the most wearisome iteration.</t:p>
<t:p>The public outside knew nothing or very little of the real House of Commons, and the manner
     in which time was squandered there, for the reports were all of them much abbreviated.  In
     fact, I doubt whether anybody but the Speaker, and one or two other persons in the same
     position as myself, really felt with proper intensity what the waste was, and how profound was
     the vanity of members and the itch for expression; for even the reporters were relieved at
     stated intervals, and the impression on their minds was not continuous.  Another evil result of
     these attendances at the House was a kind of political scepticism.  Over and over again I have
     seen a Government arraigned for its conduct of foreign affairs.  The evidence lay in masses of
     correspondence which it would have required some days to master, and the verdict, after knowing
     the facts, ought to have depended upon the application of principles, each of which admitted a
     contrary principle for which much might be pleaded.  There were not fifty members in the House
     with the leisure or the ability to understand what it was which had actually happened, and if
     they had understood it, they would not have had the wit to see what was the rule which ought to
     have decided the case.  Yet, whether they understood or not, they were obliged to vote, and
     what was worse, the constituencies also had to vote, and so the gravest matters were settled in
     utter ignorance.  This has often been adduced as an argument against an extended suffrage, but,
     if it is an argument against anything, it is an argument against intrusting the aristocracy and
     even the House itself with the destinies of the nation; for no dock labourer could possibly be
     more entirely empty of all reasons for action than the noble lords, squires, lawyers, and
     railway directors whom I have seen troop to the division bell.  There is something deeper than
     this scepticism, but the scepticism is the easiest and the most obvious conclusion to an open
     mind dealing so closely and practically with politics as it was my lot to do at this time of my
     life.  Men must be governed, and when it comes to the question, by whom? I, for one, would far
     sooner in the long run trust the people at large than I would the few, who in everything which
     relates to Government are as little instructed as the many and more difficult to move.  The
     very fickleness of the multitude, the theme of such constant declamation, is so far good that
     it proves a susceptibility to impressions to which men hedged round by impregnable
     conventionalities cannot yield. <t:ref target="#B10306_N1">[1]</t:ref></t:p>
<t:p>When I was living in the country, the pure sky and the landscape formed a large portion of my
     existence, so large that much of myself depended on it, and I wondered how men could be worth
     anything if they could never see the face of nature.  For this belief my early training on the
     “Lyrical Ballads” is answerable.  When I came to London the same creed survived, and I was for
     ever thirsting for intercourse with my ancient friend.  Hope, faith, and God seemed impossible
     amidst the smoke of the streets.  It was now very difficult for me, except at rare
     opportunities, to leave London, and it was necessary for me, therefore, to understand that all
     that was essential for me was obtainable there, even though I should never see anything more
     than was to be seen in journeying through the High Street, Camden Town, Tottenham Court Road,
     the Seven Dials, and Whitehall.  I should have been guilty of a simple surrender to despair if
     I had not forced myself to make this discovery.  I cannot help saying, with all my love for the
     literature of my own day, that it has an evil side to it which none know except the millions of
     sensitive persons who are condemned to exist in great towns.  It might be imagined from much of
     this literature that true humanity and a belief in God are the offspring of the hills or the
     ocean; and by implication, if not expressly, the vast multitudes who hardly ever see the hills
     or the ocean must be without a religion.  The long poems which turn altogether upon scenery,
     perhaps in foreign lands, and the passionate devotion to it which they breathe, may perhaps do
     good in keeping alive in the hearts of men a determination to preserve air, earth, and water
     from pollution; but speaking from experience as a Londoner, I can testify that they are most
     depressing, and I would counsel everybody whose position is what mine was to avoid these books
     and to associate with those which will help him in his own circumstances.</t:p>
<t:p>Half of my occupation soon came to an end.  One of my editors sent me a petulant note telling
     me that all I wrote he could easily find out himself, and that he required something more
     “graphic and personal.”  I could do no better, or rather I ought to say, no worse than I had
     been doing.  These letters were a great trouble to me.  I was always conscious of writing so
     much of which I was not certain, and so much which was indifferent to me.  The unfairness of
     parties haunted me.  But I continued to write, because I saw no other way of getting a living,
     and surely it is a baser dishonesty to depend upon the charity of friends because some
     pleasant, clean, ideal employment has not presented itself, than to soil one’s hands with a
     little of the inevitable mud.  I don’t think I ever felt anything more keenly than I did a
     sneer from an acquaintance of mine who was in the habit of borrowing money from me.  He was a
     painter, whose pictures were never sold because he never worked hard enough to know how to
     draw, and it came to my ears indirectly that he had said that “he would rather live the life of
     a medieval ascetic than condescend to the degradation of scribbling a dozen columns weekly of
     utter trash on subjects with which he had no concern.”  At that very moment he owed me five
     pounds.  God knows that I admitted my dozen columns to be utter trash, but it ought to have
     been forgiven by those who saw that I was struggling to save myself from the streets and to
     keep a roof over my head.  Degraded, however, as I might be, I could not get down to the
     “graphic and personal,” for it meant nothing less than the absolutely false.  I therefore
     contrived to exist on the one letter, which, excepting the mechanical labour of writing a
     second, took up as much of my time as if I had to write two.</t:p>
<t:p>Never, but once or twice at the most, did my labours meet with the slightest recognition
     beyond payment.  Once I remember that I accused a member of a discreditable manœuvre to consume
     the time of the House, and as he represented a borough in my district, he wrote to the editor
     denying the charge.  The editor without any inquiry—and I believe I was mistaken—instantly
     congratulated me on having “scored.”  At another time, when Parliament was not sitting, I
     ventured, by way of filling up my allotted space, to say a word on behalf of a now utterly
     forgotten novel.  I had a letter from the authoress thanking me, but alas! the illusion
     vanished.  I was tempted by this one novel to look into others which I found she had written,
     and I discovered that they were altogether silly.  The attraction of the one of which I thought
     so highly, was due not to any real merit which it possessed, but to something I had put into
     it.  It was dead, but it had served as a wall to re-echo my own voice.  Excepting these two
     occasions, I don’t think that one solitary human being ever applauded or condemned one solitary
     word of which I was the author.  All my friends knew where my contributions were to be found,
     but I never heard that they looked at them.  They were never worth reading, and yet such
     complete silence was rather lonely.  The tradesman who makes a good coat enjoys the
     satisfaction of having fitted and pleased his customer, and a bricklayer, if he be diligent, is
     rewarded by knowing that his master understands his value, but I never knew what it was to
     receive a single response.  I wrote for an abstraction; and spoke to empty space.  I cannot
     help claiming some pity and even respect for the class to which I belonged.  I have heard them
     called all kinds of hard names, hacks, drudges, and something even more contemptible, but the
     injustice done to them is monstrous.  Their wage is hardly earned; it is peculiarly precarious,
     depending altogether upon their health, and no matter how ill they may be they must maintain
     the liveliness of manner which is necessary to procure acceptance.  I fell in with one poor
     fellow whose line was something like my own.  I became acquainted with him through sitting side
     by side with him at the House.  He lived in lodgings in Goodge Street, and occasionally I
     walked with him as far as the corner of Tottenham Court Road, where I caught the last omnibus
     northward.  He wrote like me a “descriptive article” for the country, but he also wrote every
     now and then—a dignity to which I never attained—a “special” for London.  His “descriptive
     articles” were more political than mine, and he was obliged to be violently Tory.  His creed,
     however, was such a pure piece of professionalism, that though I was Radical, and was expected
     to be so, we never jarred, and often, as we wandered homewards, we exchanged notes, and were
     mutually useful, his observations appearing in my paper, and mine in his, with proper
     modifications.  How he used to roar in the <t:hi>Gazette</t:hi> against the opposite party, and yet
     I never heard anything from him myself but what was diffident and tender.  He had acquired, as
     an instrument necessary to him, an extraordinarily extravagant style, and he laid about him
     with a bludgeon, which inevitably descended on the heads of all prominent persons if they
     happened not to be Conservative, no matter what their virtues might be.  One peculiarity,
     however, I noted in him.  Although he ought every now and then, when the subject was uppermost,
     to have flamed out in the <t:hi>Gazette</t:hi> on behalf of the Church, I never saw a word from him
     on that subject.  He drew the line at religion.  He did not mind acting his part in things
     secular, for his performances were, I am sure, mostly histrionic, but there he stopped.  The
     unreality of his character was a husk surrounding him, but it did not touch the core.  It was
     as if he had said to himself, “Political controversy is nothing to me, and, what is more, is so
     uncertain that it matters little whether I say yes or no, nor indeed does it matter if I say
     yes <t:hi>and</t:hi> no, and I must keep my wife and children from the workhouse; but when it comes
     to the relationship of man to God, it is a different matter.”  His altogether outside vehemence
     and hypocrisy did in fact react upon him, and so far from affecting harmfully what lay deeper,
     produced a more complete sincerity and transparency extending even to the finest verbal
     distinctions.  Over and over again have I heard him preach to his wife, almost with pathos, the
     duty of perfect exactitude in speech in describing the commonest occurrences.  “Now, my dear,
      <t:hi>is</t:hi> that so?” was a perpetual remonstrance with him; and he always insisted upon it
     that there is no training more necessary for children than that of teaching them not merely to
     speak the truth in the ordinary, vulgar sense of the term, but to speak it in a much higher
     sense, by rigidly compelling, point by point, a correspondence of the words with the fact
     external or internal.  He never would tolerate in his own children a mere hackneyed, borrowed
     expression, but demanded exact portraiture; and nothing vexed him more than to hear one of them
     spoil and make worthless what he or she had seen, by reporting it in some stale phrase which
     had been used by everybody.  This refusal to take the trouble to watch the presentment to the
     mind of anything which had been placed before it, and to reproduce it in its own lines and
     colours was, as he said, nothing but falsehood, and he maintained that the principal reason why
     people are so uninteresting is not that they have nothing to say.  It is rather that they will
     not face the labour of saying in their own tongue what they have to say, but cover it up and
     conceal it in commonplace, so that we get, not what they themselves behold and what they think,
     but a hieroglyphic or symbol invented as the representative of a certain class of objects or
     emotions, and as inefficient to represent a particular object or emotion as <t:hi>x</t:hi> or
      <t:hi>y</t:hi> to set forth the relation of Hamlet to Ophelia.  He would even exercise his
     children in this art of the higher truthfulness, and would purposely make them give him an
     account of something which he had seen and they had seen, checking them the moment he saw a
     lapse from originality.  Such was the Tory correspondent of the <t:hi>Gazette</t:hi>.</t:p>
<t:p>I ought to say, by way of apology for him, that in his day it signified little or nothing
     whether Tory or Whig was in power.  Politics had not become what they will one day become, a
     matter of life or death, dividing men with really private love and hate.  What a mockery
     controversy was in the House!  How often I have seen members, who were furious at one another
     across the floor, quietly shaking hands outside, and inviting one another to dinner!  I have
     heard them say that we ought to congratulate ourselves that parliamentary differences do not in
     this country breed personal animosities.  To me this seemed anything but a subject of
     congratulation.  Men who are totally at variance ought not to be friends, and if Radical and
     Tory are not totally, but merely superficially at variance, so much the worse for their
     Radicalism and Toryism.</t:p>
<t:p>It is possible, and even probable, that the public fury and the subsequent amity were equally
     absurd.  Most of us have no real loves and no real hatreds.  Blessed is love, less blessed is
     hatred, but thrice accursed is that indifference which is neither one nor the other, the muddy
     mess which men call friendship.</t:p>
<t:p>M’Kay—for that was his name—lived, as I have said, in Goodge Street, where he had unfurnished
     apartments.  I often spent part of the Sunday with him, and I may forestall obvious criticism
     by saying that I do not pretend for a moment to defend myself from inconsistency in denouncing
     members of Parliament for their duplicity, M’Kay and myself being also guilty of something very
     much like it.  But there was this difference between us and our parliamentary friends, that we
     always divested ourselves of all hypocrisy when we were alone.  We then dropped the stage
     costume which members continued to wear in the streets and at the dinner-table, and in which
     some of them even slept and said their prayers.</t:p>
<t:p>London Sundays to persons who are not attached to any religious community, and have no money
     to spend, are rather dreary.  We tried several ways of getting through the morning.  If we
     heard that there was a preacher with a reputation, we went to hear him.  As a rule, however, we
     got no good in that way.  Once we came to a chapel where there was a minister supposed to be
     one of the greatest orators of the day.  We had much difficulty in finding standing room.  Just
     as we entered we heard him say, “My friends, I appeal to those of you who are parents.  You
     know that if you say to a child ‘go,’ he goeth, and if you say ‘come,’ he cometh.  So the
     Lord”—  But at this point M’Kay, who had children, nudged me to come out; and out we went.  Why
     does this little scene remain with me?  I can hardly say, but here it stands.  It is
     remembered, not so much by reason of the preacher as by reason of the apparent acquiescence and
     admiration of the audience, who seemed to be perfectly willing to take over an experience from
     their pastor—if indeed it was really an experience—which was not their own.  Our usual haunts
     on Sunday were naturally the parks and Kensington Gardens; but artificial limited enclosures
     are apt to become wearisome after a time, and we longed for a little more freedom if a little
     less trim.  So we would stroll towards Hampstead or Highgate, the only drawback to these
     regions being the squalid, ragged, half town, half suburb, through which it was necessary to
     pass.  The skirts of London when the air is filled with north-easterly soot, grit, and filth,
     are cheerless, and the least cheerful part of the scene is the inability of the vast wandering
     masses of people to find any way of amusing themselves.  At the corner of one of the fields in
     Kentish Town, just about to be devoured, stood a public-house, and opposite the door was
     generally encamped a man who sold nothing but Brazil nuts.  Swarms of people lazily wandered
     past him, most of them waiting for the public-house to open.  Brazil nuts on a cold black
     Sunday morning are not exhilarating, but the costermonger found many customers who bought his
     nuts, and ate them, merely because they had nothing better to do.  We went two or three times
     to a freethinking hall, where we were entertained with demonstrations of the immorality of the
     patriarchs and Jewish heroes, and arguments to prove that the personal existence of the devil
     was a myth, the audience breaking out into uproarious laughter at comical delineations of Noah
     and Jonah.  One morning we found the place completely packed.  A “celebrated Christian,” as he
     was described to us, having heard of the hall, had volunteered to engage in debate on the
     claims of the Old Testament to Divine authority.  He turned out to be a preacher whom we knew
     quite well.  He was introduced by his freethinking antagonist, who claimed for him a respectful
     hearing.  The preacher said that before beginning he should like to “engage in prayer.” 
     Accordingly he came to the front of the platform, lifted up his eyes, told God why he was
     there, and besought Him to bless the discussion in the conversion “of these poor wandering
     souls, who have said in their hearts that there is no God, to a saving faith in Him and in the
     blood of Christ.”  I expected that some resentment would be displayed when the wandering souls
     found themselves treated like errant sheep, but to my surprise they listened with perfect
     silence; and when he had said “Amen,” there were great clappings of hands, and cries of
     “Bravo.”  They evidently considered the prayer merely as an elocutionary show-piece.  The
     preacher was much disconcerted, but he recovered himself, and began his sermon, for it was
     nothing more.  He enlarged on the fact that men of the highest eminence had believed in the Old
     Testament.  Locke and Newton had believed in it, and did it not prove arrogance in us to doubt
     when the “gigantic intellect which had swept the skies, and had announced the law which bound
     the universe together was satisfied?”  The witness of the Old Testament to the New was another
     argument, but his main reliance was upon the prophecies.  From Adam to Isaiah there was a
     continuous prefigurement of Christ.  Christ was the point to which everything tended; and “now,
     my friends,” he said, “I cannot sit down without imploring you to turn your eyes on Him who
     never yet repelled the sinner, to wash in that eternal Fountain ever open for the remission of
     sins, and to flee from the wrath to come.  I believe the sacred symbol of the cross has not yet
     lost its efficacy.  For eighteen hundred years, whenever it has been exhibited to the sons of
     men, it has been potent to reclaim and save them.  ‘I, if I be lifted up,’ cried the Great
     Sufferer, ‘will draw all men unto Me,’ and He has drawn not merely the poor and ignorant but
     the philosopher and the sage.  Oh, my brethren, think what will happen if you reject Him.  I
     forbear to paint your doom.  And think again, on the other hand, of the bliss which awaits you
     if you receive Him, of the eternal companionship with the Most High and with the spirits of
     just men made perfect.”  His hearers again applauded vigorously, and none less so than their
     appointed leader, who was to follow on the other side.  He was a little man with small eyes;
     his shaven face was dark with a black beard lurking under the skin, and his nose was slightly
     turned up.  He was evidently a trained debater who had practised under railway arches,
     discussion “forums,” and in the classes promoted by his sect.  He began by saying that he could
     not compliment his friend who had just sat down on the inducements which he had offered them to
     become Christians.  The New Cut was not a nice place on a wet day, but he had rather sit at a
     stall there all day long with his feet on a basket than lie in the bosom of some of the just
     men made perfect portrayed in the Bible.  Nor, being married, should he feel particularly at
     ease if he had to leave his wife with David.  David certainly ought to have got beyond all that
     kind of thing, considering it must be over 3000 years since he first saw Bathsheba; but we are
     told that the saints are for ever young in heaven, and this treacherous villain, who would have
     been tried by a jury of twelve men and hung outside Newgate if he had lived in the nineteenth
     century, might be dangerous now.  He was an amorous old gentleman up to the very last.  (Roars
     of laughter.)  Nor did the speaker feel particularly anxious to be shut up with all the
     bishops, who of course are amongst the elect, and on their departure from this vale of tears
     tempered by ten thousand a year, are duly supplied with wings.  Much more followed in the same
     strain upon the immorality of the Bible heroes, their cruelty, and the cruelty of the God who
     sanctioned it.  Then followed a clever exposition of the inconsistencies of the Old Testament
     history, the impossibility of any reference to Jesus therein, and a really earnest protest
     against the quibbling by which those who believed in the Bible as a revelation sought to
     reconcile it with science.  “Finally,” said the speaker, “I am sure we all of us will pass a
     vote of thanks to our reverend friend for coming to see us, and we cordially invite him to come
     again.  If I might be allowed to offer a suggestion, it would be that he should make himself
     acquainted with our case before he pays us another visit, and not suppose that we are to be
     persuaded with the rhetoric which may do very well for the young women of his congregation, but
     won’t go down here.”  This was fair and just, for the eminent Christian was nothing but an
     ordinary minister, who, when he was prepared for his profession, had never been allowed to see
     what are the historical difficulties of Christianity, lest he should be overcome by them.  On
     the other hand, his sceptical opponents were almost devoid of the faculty for appreciating the
     great remains of antiquity, and would probably have considered the machinery of the Prometheus
     Bound or of the Iliad a sufficient reason for a sneer.  That they should spend their time in
     picking the Bible to pieces when there was so much positive work for them to do, seemed to me
     as melancholy as if they had spent themselves upon theology.  To waste a Sunday morning in
     ridiculing such stories as that of Jonah was surely as imbecile as to waste it in proving their
     verbal veracity.</t:p>
</t:div>