<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>CHAPTER VI <t:hi>DRURY LANE THEOLOGY</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>Such were some of our disciples.  I do not think that church or chapel would have
     done them much good.  Preachers are like unskilled doctors with the same pill and draught for
     every complaint.  They do not know where the fatal spot lies on lung or heart or nerve which
     robs us of life.  If any of these persons just described had gone to church or chapel they
     would have heard discourses on the usual set topics, none of which would have concerned them. 
     Their trouble was not the forgiveness of sins, the fallacies of Arianism, the personality of
     the Holy Ghost, or the doctrine of the Eucharist.  They all <t:hi>wanted</t:hi> something
     distinctly.  They had great gaping needs which they longed to satisfy, intensely practical and
     special.  Some of these necessities no words could in any way meet.  It was obvious, for
     instance, that Clark must at once be taken away from his gallery and his copying if he was to
     live—at least in sanity.  He had fortunately learned shorthand, and M’Kay got him employment on
     a newspaper.  His knowledge of his art was by no means perfect at first, but he was sent to
     attend meetings where <t:hi>verbatim</t:hi> reports were not necessary, and he quickly advanced. 
     Taylor, too, we tried to remove, and we succeeded in attaching him to a large club as an
     out-of-doors porter.  The poor man was now at least in the open air, and freed from insolent
     tyranny.  This, however, was help such as anybody might have given.  The question of most
     importance is, What gospel had we to give?  Why, in short, did we meet on the Sunday?  What was
     our justification?  In the first place, there was the simple quietude.  The retreat from the
     streets and from miserable cares into a place where there was peace and room for reflection was
     something.  It is all very well for cultivated persons with libraries to scoff at religious
     services.  To the poor the cathedral or the church might be an immense benefit, if only for the
     reason that they present a barrier to worldly noise, and are a distinct invitation by
     architecture and symbolic decoration to meditation on something beyond the business which
     presses on them during the week.  Poor people frequently cannot read for want of a place in
     which to read.  Moreover, they require to be provoked by a stronger stimulus than that of a
     book.  They willingly hear a man talk if he has anything to say, when they would not care to
     look at what he said if it were printed.  But to come more closely to the point.  Our main
     object was to create in our hearers contentment with their lot; and even some joy in it.  That
     was our religion; that was the central thought of all we said and did, giving shape and
     tendency to everything.  We admitted nothing which did not help us in that direction, and
     everything which did help us.  Our attempts, to any one who had not the key, may have seemed
     vague and desultory.  We might by a stranger have been accused of feeble wandering, of idle
     dabbling, now in this subject and now in that, but after a while he would have found that
     though we were weak creatures, with no pretence to special knowledge in any subject, we at
     least knew what we meant, and tried to accomplish it.  For my own part, I was happy when I had
     struck that path.  I felt as if somehow, after many errors, I had once more gained a road, a
     religion in fact, and one which essentially was not new but old, the religion of the
     Reconciliation, the reconciliation of man with God; differing from the current creed in so far
     as I did not lay stress upon sin as the cause of estrangement, but yet agreeing with it in
     making it my duty of duties to suppress revolt, and to submit calmly and sometimes cheerfully
     to the Creator.  This surely, under a thousand disguises, has been the meaning of all the forms
     of worship which we have seen in the world.  Pain and death are nothing new, and men have been
     driven into perplexed scepticism, and even insurrection by them, ever since men came into
     being.  Always, however, have the majority, the vast majority of the race, felt instinctively
     that in this scepticism and insurrection they could not abide, and they have struggled more or
     less blindly after explanation; determined not to desist till they had found it, and reaching a
     result embodied in a multitude of shapes irrational and absurd to the superficial scoffer, but
     of profound interest to the thoughtful.  I may observe, in passing, that this is a reason why
     all great religions should be treated with respect, and in a certain sense preserved.  It is
     nothing less than a wicked waste of accumulated human strivings to sneer them out of
     existence.  They will be found, every one of them, to have incarnated certain vital doctrines
     which it has cost centuries of toil and devotion properly to appreciate.  Especially is this
     true of the Catholic faith, and if it were worth while, it might be shown how it is nothing
     less than a divine casket of precious remedies, and if it is to be brutally broken, it will
     take ages to rediscover and restore them.  Of one thing I am certain, that their rediscovery
     and restoration will be necessary.  I cannot too earnestly insist upon the need of our holding,
     each man for himself, by some faith which shall anchor him.  It must not be taken up by
     chance.  We must fight for it, for only so will it become <t:hi>our</t:hi> faith.  The halt in
     indifference or in hostility is easy enough and seductive enough.  The half-hearted thinks that
     when he has attained that stage he has completed the term of human wisdom.  I say go on: do not
     stay there; do not take it for granted that there is nothing beyond; incessantly attempt an
     advance, and at last a light, dim it may be, will arise.  It will not be a completed system,
     perfect in all points, an answer to all our questions, but at least it will give ground for
     hope.</t:p>
<t:p>We had to face the trials of our friends, and we had to face death.  I do not say for an
     instant that we had any effectual reply to these great arguments against us.  We never so much
     as sought for one, knowing how all men had sought and failed.  But we were able to say there is
     some compensation, that there is another side, and this is all that man can say.  No theory of
     the world is possible.  The storm, the rain slowly rotting the harvest, children sickening in
     cellars are obvious; but equally obvious are an evening in June, the delight of men and women
     in one another, in music, and in the exercise of thought.  There can surely be no question that
     the sum of satisfaction is increasing, not merely in the gross but for each human being, as the
     earth from which we sprang is being worked out of the race, and a higher type is being
     developed.  I may observe, too, that although it is usually supposed, it is erroneously
     supposed, that it is pure doubt which disturbs or depresses us.  Simple suspense is in fact
     very rare, for there are few persons so constituted as to be able to remain in it.  It is
     dogmatism under the cloak of doubt which pulls us down.  It is the dogmatism of death, for
     example, which we have to avoid.  The open grave is dogmatic, and we say <t:hi>that man has
      gone</t:hi>, but this is as much a transgression of the limits of certitude as if we were to say
      <t:hi>he is an angel in bliss</t:hi>.  The proper attitude, the attitude enjoined by the severest
     exercise of the reason is, <t:hi>I do not know</t:hi>; and in this there is an element of hope, now
     rising and now falling, but always sufficient to prevent that blank despair which we must feel
     if we consider it as settled that when we lie down under the grass there is an absolute
     end.</t:p>
<t:p>The provision in nature of infinity ever present to us is an immense help.  No man can look
     up to the stars at night and reflect upon what lies behind them without feeling that the
     tyranny of the senses is loosened, and the tyranny, too, of the conclusions of his logic.  The
     beyond and the beyond, let us turn it over as we may, let us consider it as a child considers
     it, or by the light of the newest philosophy, is a constant, visible warning not to make our
     minds the measure of the universe.  Underneath the stars what dreams, what conjectures arise,
     shadowy enough, it is true; but one thing we cannot help believing as irresistibly as if by
     geometrical deduction—that the sphere of that understanding of ours, whose function it seems to
     be to imprison us, is limited.</t:p>
<t:p>Going through a churchyard one afternoon I noticed that nearly all the people who were buried
     there, if the inscriptions on the tombstones might be taken to represent the thoughts of the
     departed when they were alive, had been intent solely on their own personal salvation.  The
     question with them all seemed to have been, shall <t:hi>I</t:hi> go to heaven?  Considering the
     tremendous difference between heaven and hell in the popular imagination, it was very natural
     that these poor creatures should be anxious above everything to know whether they would be in
     hell or heaven for ever.  Surely, however, this is not the highest frame of mind, nor is it one
     to be encouraged.  I would rather do all I can to get out of it, and to draw others out of it
     too.  Our aim ought not so much to be the salvation of this poor petty self, but of that in me
     which alone makes it worth while to save me; of that alone which I hope will be saved, immortal
     truth.  The very centre of the existence of the ordinary chapel-goer and church-goer needs to
     be shifted from self to what is outside self, and yet is truly self, and the sole truth of
     self.  If the truth lives, <t:hi>we</t:hi> live, and if it dies, we are dead.  Our theology stands
     in need of a reformation greater than that of Luther’s.  It may be said that the attempt to
     replace the care for self in us by a care for the universal is ridiculous.  Man cannot rise to
     that height.  I do not believe it.  I believe we can rise to it.  Every ordinary unselfish act
     is a proof of the capacity to rise to it; and the mother’s denial of all care for her own
     happiness, if she can but make her child happy, is a sublime anticipation.  It may be called an
     instinct, but in the course of time it will be possible to develop a wider instinct in us, so
     that our love for the truth shall be even maternally passionate and self-forgetting.</t:p>
<t:p>After all our searching it was difficult to find anything which, in the case of a man like
     John the waiter, for example, could be of any service to him.  At his age efficient help was
     beyond us, and in his case the problem presented itself in its simple nakedness.  What comfort
     is there discoverable for the wretched which is not based upon illusion?  We could not tell him
     that all he endured was right and proper.  But even to him we were able to offer something.  We
     did all we could to soothe him.  On the Sunday, at least, he was able to find some relief from
     his labours, and he entered into a different region.  He came to see us in the afternoon and
     evening occasionally, and brought his boy.  Father and son were pulled up out of the vault,
     brought into the daylight, and led into an open expanse.  We tried above everything to interest
     them, even in the smallest degree, in what is universal and impersonal, feeling that in that
     direction lies healing.  We explained to the child as well as we could some morsels of science,
     and in explaining to him we explained to the father as well.  When the anguish begotten by some
     outbreak on the part of the wife more violent than usual became almost too much to bear, we did
     our best to counsel, and as a last consolation we could point to Death, divine Death, and
     repose.  It was but for a few more years at the utmost, and then must come a rest which no
     sorrow could invade.  “Having death as an ally, I do not tremble at shadows,” is an immortal
     quotation from some unknown Greek author.  Providence, too, by no miracle, came to our relief. 
     The wife died, as it was foreseen she must, and that weight being removed, some elasticity and
     recoil developed itself.  John’s one thought now was for his child, and by means of the child
     the father passed out of himself, and connected himself with the future.  The child did in fact
     teach the father exactly what we tried to teach, and taught it with a power of conviction which
     never could have been produced by any mere appeals to the reason.  The father felt that he was
     battered, useless, and a failure, but that in the boy there were unknown possibilities, and
     that he might in after life say that it was to this battered, useless failure of a father he
     owed his success.  There was nothing now that he would not do to help Tom’s education, and we
     joyfully aided as best we could.  So, partly I believe by us, but far more by nature herself,
     John’s salvation was wrought out at least in a measure; discord by the intervention of another
     note resolved itself into a kind of harmony, and even through the skylight in the Strand a
     glimpse of the azure was obtained.</t:p>
<t:p>I hope my readers, if I should ever have any, will remember that what I wish to do is to give
     some account of the manner in which we sought to be of service to the small and very humble
     circle of persons whom we had collected about us.  I have preserved no record of anything; I am
     merely putting down what now comes into my mind—the two or three articles, not thirty-nine,
     nor, alas! a third of that number—which we were able to hold.  I recollect one or two more
     which perhaps are worth preservation.  In my younger days the aim of theologians was the
     justification of the ways of God to man.  They could not succeed.  They succeeded no better
     than ourselves in satisfying the intellect with a system.  Nor does the Christian religion
     profess any such satisfaction.  It teaches rather the great doctrine of a Remedy, of a
     Mediator; and therein it is profoundly true.  It is unphilosophical in the sense that it offers
     no explanation from a single principle, and leaves the ultimate mystery as dark as before, but
     it is in accordance with our intuitions.  Everywhere in nature we see exaction of penalties
     down to the uttermost farthing, but following after this we discern forgiveness, obliterating
     and restorative.  Both tendencies exist.  Nature is Rhadamanthine, and more so, for she visits
     the sins of the fathers upon the children; but there is in her also an infinite Pity, healing
     all wounds, softening all calamities, ever hastening to alleviate and repair.  Christianity in
     strange historical fashion is an expression of nature, a projection of her into a biography and
     a creed.</t:p>
<t:p>We endeavoured to follow Christianity in the depth of its distinction between right and
     wrong.  Herein this religion is of priceless value.  Philosophy proclaims the unity of our
     nature.  To philosophy every passion is as natural as every act of saintlike negation, and one
     of the usual effects of thinking or philosophising is to bring together all that is apparently
     contrary in man, and to show how it proceeds really from one centre.  But Christianity had not
     to propound a theory of man; it had to redeem the world.  It laid awful stress on the duality
     in us, and the stress laid on that duality is the world’s salvation.  The words right and wrong
     are not felt now as they were felt by Paul.  They shade off one into the other.  Nevertheless,
     if mankind is not to be lost, the ancient antagonism must be maintained.  The shallowest of
     mortals is able now to laugh at the notion of a personal devil.  No doubt there is no such
     thing existent; but the horror at evil which could find no other expression than in the
     creation of a devil is no subject for laughter, and if it do not in some shape or other
     survive, the race itself will not survive.  No religion, so far as I know, has dwelt like
     Christianity with such profound earnestness on the bisection of man—on the distinction within
     him, vital to the very last degree, between the higher and the lower, heaven and hell.  What
     utter folly is it because of an antique vesture to condemn as effete what the vesture clothes! 
     Its doctrine and its sacred story are fixtures in concrete form of precious thoughts purchased
     by blood and tears.</t:p>
<t:p>I fancy I see the sneer of theologians and critics at our efforts.  The theologians will mock
     us because we had nothing better to say.  I can only reply that we did our best.  We said all
     we knew, and we would most thankfully have said more, had we been sure that it must be true.  I
     would remind, too, those of our judges who think that we were such wretched mortals, blind
     leaders of the blind, that there have been long ages during which men never pretended to
     understand more than we professed to understand.  To say nothing of the Jews, whose meagre
     system would certainly not have been thought either satisfying or orthodox by modern
     Christians, the Greeks and Romans lived in no clearer light than that which shines on me.  The
     critics, too, will condemn because of our weakness; but this defect I at once concede.  The
     severest critic could not possibly be so severe as I am upon myself.  I <t:hi>know</t:hi> my
     failings.  He, probably, would miss many of them.  But, again I urge that men are not to be
     debarred by reason of weakness from doing what little good may lie within reach of their
     hands.  Had we attempted to save scholars and thinkers we should have deserved the ridicule
     with which no doubt we shall be visited.  We aspired to save nobody.  We knew no salvation
     ourselves.  We ventured humbly to bring a feeble ray of light into the dwellings of two or
     three poor men and women; and if Prometheus, fettered to his rock, dwelt with pride on the
     blind hopes which he had caused to visit mortals, the hopes which “stopped the continued
     anticipation of their destiny,” we perhaps may be pardoned if at times we thought that what we
     were doing was not altogether vanity.</t:p>
</t:div>