<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>CHAPTER III <t:hi>MISS LEROY</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>During the great French war there were many French prisoners in my native town. 
     They led a strange isolated life, for they knew nothing of our language, nor, in those days,
     did three people in the town understand theirs.  The common soldiers amused themselves by
     making little trifles and selling them.  I have now before me a box of coloured straw with the
     date 1799 on the bottom, which was bought by my grandfather.  One of these prisoners was an
     officer named Leroy.  Why he did not go back to France I never heard, but I know that before I
     was born he was living near our house on a small income; that he tried to teach French, and
     that he had as his companion a handsome daughter who grew up speaking English.  What she was
     like when she was young I cannot say, but I have had her described to me over and over again. 
     She had rather darkish brown hair, and she was tall and straight as an arrow.  This she was, by
     the way, even into old age.  She surprised, shocked, and attracted all the sober persons in our
     circle.  Her ways were not their ways.  She would walk out by herself on a starry night without
     a single companion, and cause thereby infinite talk, which would have converged to a single
     focus if it had not happened that she was also in the habit of walking out at four o’clock on a
     summer’s morning, and that in the church porch of a little village not far from us, which was
     her favourite resting-place, a copy of the <t:hi>De Imitatione Christi</t:hi> was found which
     belonged to her.  So the talk was scattered again and its convergence prevented.  She used to
     say doubtful things about love.  One of them struck my mother with horror.  Miss Leroy told a
     male person once, and told him to his face, that if she loved him and he loved her, and they
     agreed to sign one another’s foreheads with a cross as a ceremony, it would be as good to her
     as marriage.  This may seem a trifle, but nobody now can imagine what was thought of it at the
     time it was spoken.  My mother repeated it every now and then for fifty years.  It may be
     conjectured how easily any other girls of our acquaintance would have been classified, and
     justly classified, if they had uttered such barefaced Continental immorality.  Miss Leroy’s
     neighbours were remarkably apt at classifying their fellow-creatures.  They had a few, a very
     few holes, into which they dropped their neighbours, and they must go into one or the other. 
     Nothing was more distressing than a specimen which, notwithstanding all the violence which
     might be used to it, would not fit into a hole, but remained an exception.  Some lout, I
     believe, reckoning on the legitimacy of his generalisation, and having heard of this and other
     observations accredited to Miss Leroy, ventured to be slightly rude to her.  What she said to
     him was never known, but he was always shy afterwards of mentioning her name, and when he did
     he was wont to declare that she was “a rum un.”  She was not particular, I have heard, about
     personal tidiness, and this I can well believe, for she was certainly not distinguished when I
     knew her for this virtue.  She cared nothing for the linen-closet, the spotless bed-hangings,
     and the bright poker, which were the true household gods of the respectable women of those
     days.  She would have been instantly set down as “slut,” and as having “nasty dirty forrin
     ways,” if a peculiar habit of hers had not unfortunately presented itself, most irritating to
     her critics, so anxious promptly to gratify their philosophic tendency towards scientific
     grouping.  Mrs. Mobbs, who lived next door to her, averred that she always slept with the
     window open.  Mrs. Mobbs, like everybody else, never opened her window except to “air the
     room.”  Mrs. Mobbs’ best bedroom was carpeted all over, and contained a great four-post
     bedstead, hung round with heavy hangings, and protected at the top from draughts by a kind of
     firmament of white dimity.  Mrs. Mobbs stuffed a sack of straw up the chimney of the fireplace,
     to prevent the fall of the “sutt,” as she called it.  Mrs. Mobbs, if she had a visitor, gave
     her a hot supper, and expected her immediately afterwards to go upstairs, draw the window
     curtains, get into this bed, draw the bed curtains also, and wake up the next morning
     “bilious.”  This was the proper thing to do.  Miss Leroy’s sitting-room was decidedly
     disorderly; the chairs were dusty; “yer might write yer name on the table,” Mrs. Mobbs
     declared; but, nevertheless, the casement was never closed night nor day; and, moreover, Miss
     Leroy was believed by the strongest circumstantial evidence to wash herself all over every
     morning, a habit which Mrs. Mobbs thought “weakening,” and somehow connected with ethical
     impropriety.  When Miss Leroy was married, and first as an elderly woman became known to me,
     she was very inconsequential in her opinions, or at least appeared so to our eyes.  She must
     have been much more so when she was younger.  In our town we were all formed upon recognised
     patterns, and those who possessed any one mark of the pattern, had all.  The wine-merchant, for
     example, who went to church, eminently respectable, Tory, by no means associating with the
     tradesfolk who displayed their goods in the windows, knowing no “experience,” and who had never
     felt the outpouring of the Spirit, was a specimen of a class like him.  Another class was
     represented by the dissenting ironmonger, deacon, presiding at prayer-meetings, strict
     Sabbatarian, and believer in eternal punishments; while a third was set forth by “Guffy,” whose
     real name was unknown, who got drunk, unloaded barges, assisted at the municipal elections, and
     was never once seen inside a place of worship.  These patterns had existed amongst us from the
     dimmest antiquity, and were accepted as part of the eternal order of things; so much so, that
     the deacon, although he professed to be sure that nobody who had not been converted would
     escape the fire—and the wine-merchant certainly had not been converted—was very far from
     admitting to himself that the wine-merchant ought to be converted, or that it would be proper
     to try and convert him.  I doubt, indeed, whether our congregation would have been happy, or
     would have thought any the better of him, if he had left the church.  Such an event, however,
     could no more come within the reach of our vision than a reversal of the current of our river. 
     It would have broken up our foundations and party-walls, and would have been considered as
     ominous, and anything but a subject for thankfulness.  But Miss Leroy was not the
     wine-merchant, nor the ironmonger, nor Guffy, and even now I cannot trace the hidden centre of
     union from which sprang so much that was apparently irreconcilable.  She was a person whom
     nobody could have created in writing a novel, because she was so inconsistent.  As I have said
     before, she studied Thomas à Kempis, and her little French Bible was brown with constant use. 
     But then she read much fiction in which there were scenes which would have made our hair stand
     on end.  The only thing she constantly abhorred in books was what was dull and opaque.  Yet, as
     we shall see presently, her dislike to dulness, once at least in her life, notably failed her. 
     She was not Catholic, and professed herself Protestant, but such a Protestantism!  She had no
     sceptical doubts.  She believed implicitly that the Bible was the Word of God, and that
     everything in it was true, but her interpretation of it was of the strangest kind.  Almost all
     our great doctrines seemed shrunk to nothing in her eyes, while others, which were nothing to
     us, were all-important to her.  The atonement, for instance, I never heard her mention, but
     Unitarianism was hateful to her, and Jesus was her God in every sense of the word.  On the
     other hand, she was partly Pagan, for she knew very little of that consideration for the
     feeble, and even for the foolish, which is the glory of Christianity.  She was rude to foolish
     people, and she instinctively kept out of the way of all disease and weakness, so that in this
     respect she was far below the commonplace tradesman’s wife, who visited the sick, sat up with
     them, and, in fact, never seemed so completely in her element as when she could be with anybody
     who was ill in bed.</t:p>
<t:p>Miss Leroy’s father was republican, and so was my grandfather.  My grandfather and old Leroy
     were the only people in our town who refused to illuminate when a victory was gained over the
     French.  Leroy’s windows were spared on the ground that he was not a Briton, but the mob
     endeavoured to show my grandfather the folly of his belief in democracy by smashing every pane
     of glass in front of his house with stones.  This drew him and Leroy together, and the result
     was, that although Leroy himself never set foot inside any chapel or church, Miss Leroy was
     often induced to attend our meeting-house in company with a maiden aunt of mine, who rather
     “took to her.”  Now comes the for ever mysterious passage in history.  There was amongst the
     attendants at that meeting-house a young man who was apprentice to a miller.  He was a big,
     soft, quiet, plump-faced, awkward youth, very good, but nothing more.  He wore on Sunday a
     complete suit of light pepper-and-salt clothes, and continued to wear pepper-and-salt on Sunday
     all his life.  He taught in the Sunday-school, and afterwards, as he got older, he was
     encouraged to open his lips at a prayer-meeting, and to “take the service” in the village
     chapels on Sunday evening.  He was the most singularly placid, even-tempered person I ever
     knew.  I first became acquainted with him when I was a child and he was past middle life.  What
     he was then, I am told, he always was; and I certainly never heard one single violent word
     escape his lips.  His habits, even when young, had a tendency to harden.  He went to sleep
     after his mid-day dinner with the greatest regularity, and he never could keep awake if he sat
     by a fire after dark.  I have seen him, when kneeling at family worship and praying with his
     family, lose himself for an instant and nod his head, to the confusion of all who were around
     him.  He is dead now, but he lived to a good old age, which crept upon him gradually with no
     pain, and he passed away from this world to the next in a peaceful doze.  He never read
     anything, for the simple reason that whenever he was not at work or at chapel he slumbered.  To
     the utter amazement of everybody, it was announced one fine day that Miss Leroy and he—George
     Butts—were to be married.  They were about the last people in the world, who, it was thought,
     could be brought together.  My mother was stunned, and never completely recovered.  I have seen
     her, forty years after George Butts’ wedding-day, lift up her hands, and have heard her call
     out with emotion, as fresh as if the event were of yesterday, “What made that girl have George
     I can <t:hi>not</t:hi> think—but there!”  What she meant by the last two words we could not
     comprehend.  Many of her acquaintances interpreted them to mean that she knew more than she
     dared communicate, but I think they were mistaken.  I am quite certain if she had known
     anything she must have told it, and, in the next place, the phrase “but there” was not uncommon
     amongst women in our town, and was supposed to mark the consciousness of a prudently restrained
     ability to give an explanation of mysterious phenomena in human relationships.  For my own
     part, I am just as much in the dark as my mother.  My father, who was a shrewd man, was always
     puzzled, and could not read the riddle.  He used to say that he never thought George could have
     “made up” to any young woman, and it was quite clear that Miss Leroy did not either then or
     afterwards display any violent affection for him.  I have heard her criticise and patronise him
     as a “good soul,” but incapable, as indeed he was, of all sympathy with her.  After marriage
     she went her way and he his.  She got up early, as she was wont to do, and took her Bible into
     the fields while he was snoring.  She would then very likely suffer from a terrible headache
     during the rest of the day, and lie down for hours, letting the house manage itself as best it
     could.  What made her selection of George more obscure was that she was much admired by many
     young fellows, some of whom were certainly more akin to her than he was; and I have heard from
     one or two reports of encouraging words, and even something more than words, which she had
     vouchsafed to them.  A solution is impossible.  The affinities, repulsions, reasons in a nature
     like that of Miss Leroy’s are so secret and so subtle, working towards such incalculable and
     not-to-be-predicted results, that to attempt to make a major and minor premiss and an
     inevitable conclusion out of them would be useless.  One thing was clear, that by marrying
     George she gained great freedom.  If she had married anybody closer to her, she might have
     jarred with him; there might have been collision and wreck as complete as if they had been
     entirely opposed; for she was not the kind of person to accommodate herself to others even in
     the matter of small differences.  But George’s road through space lay entirely apart from hers,
     and there was not the slightest chance of interference.  She was under the protection of a
     husband; she could do things that, as an unmarried woman, especially in a foreign land, she
     could not do, and the compensatory sacrifice to her was small.  This is really the only attempt
     at elucidation I can give.  She went regularly all her life to chapel with George, but even
     when he became deacon, and “supplied” the villages round, she never would join the church as a
     member.  She never agreed with the minister, and he never could make anything out of her.  They
     did not quarrel, but she thought nothing of his sermons, and he was perplexed and uncomfortable
     in the presence of a nondescript who did not respond to any dogmatic statement of the articles
     of religion, and who yet could not be put aside as “one of those in the gallery”—that is to
     say, as one of the ordinary unconverted, for she used to quote hymns with amazing fervour, and
     she quoted them to him with a freedom and a certain superiority which he might have expected
     from an aged brother minister, but certainly not from one of his own congregation.  He was a
     preacher of the Gospel, it was true; and it was his duty, a duty on which he insisted, to be
     “instant in season and out of season” in saying spiritual things to his flock; but then they
     were things proper, decent, conventional, uttered with gravity at suitable times—such as were
     customary amongst all the ministers of the denomination.  It was not pleasant to be outbid in
     his own department, especially by one who was not a communicant, and to be obliged, when he
     went on a pastoral visit to a house in which Mrs. Butts happened to be, to sit still and hear
     her, regardless of the minister’s presence, conclude a short mystical monologue with Cowper’s
     verse—</t:p>
<t:quote>“
     <t:l>Exults our rising soul,    </t:l>
<t:l>Disburdened of her load, </t:l>
<t:l>And swells unutterably full    </t:l>
<t:l>Of glory and of God.</t:l>”</t:quote>
<t:p>This was <t:hi>not</t:hi> pleasant to our minister, nor was it pleasant to the minister’s wife. 
     But George Butts held a responsible position in our community, and the minister’s wife held
     also a responsible position, so that she taxed all her ingenuity to let her friends understand
     at tea-parties what she thought of Mrs. Butts without saying anything which could be the ground
     of formal remonstrance.  Thus did Mrs. Butts live among us, as an Arabian bird with its
     peculiar habits, cries, and plumage might live in one of our barn-yards with the ordinary
     barn-door fowls.</t:p>
<t:p>I was never happier when I was a boy than when I was with Mrs. Butts at the mill, which
     George had inherited.  There was a grand freedom in her house.  The front door leading into the
     garden was always open.  There was no precise separation between the house and the mill.  The
     business and the dwelling-place were mixed up together, and covered with flour.  Mr. Butts was
     in the habit of walking out of his mill into the living-room every now and then, and never
     dreamed when one o’clock came that it was necessary for him to change his floury coat before he
     had his dinner.  His cap he also often retained, and in any weather, not extraordinarily cold,
     he sat in his shirtsleeves.  The garden was large and half-wild.  A man from the mill, if work
     was slack, gave a day to it now and then, but it was not trimmed and raked and combed like the
     other gardens in the town.  It was full of gooseberry trees, and I was permitted to eat the
     gooseberries without stint.  The mill-life, too, was inexpressibly attractive—the dark chamber
     with the great, green, dripping wheel in it, so awfully mysterious as the central life of the
     whole structure; the machinery connected with the wheel—I knew not how; the hole where the
     roach lay by the side of the mill-tail in the eddy; the haunts of the water-rats which we used
     to hunt with Spot, the black and tan terrier, and the still more exciting sport with the
     ferrets—all this drew me down the lane perpetually.  I liked, and even loved Mrs. Butts, too,
     for her own sake.  Her kindness to me was unlimited, and she was never overcome with the fear
     of “spoiling me,” which seemed the constant dread of most of my hostesses.  I never lost my
     love for her.  It grew as I grew, despite my mother’s scarcely suppressed hostility to her, and
     when I heard she was ill, and was likely to die, I went to be with her.  She was eighty years
     old then.  I sat by her bedside with her hand in mine.  I was there when she passed away,
     and—but I have no mind and no power to say any more, for all the memories of her affection and
     of the sunny days by the water come over me and prevent the calmness necessary for a
     chronicle.  She with all her faults and eccentricities will always have in my heart a little
     chapel with an ever-burning light.  She was one of the very very few whom I have ever seen who
     knew how to love a child.</t:p>
<t:p>Mrs. Butts and George had one son who was named Clement.  He was exactly my own age, and
     naturally we were constant companions.  We went to the same school.  He never distinguished
     himself at his books, but he was chief among us.  He had a versatile talent for almost every
     accomplishment in which we delighted, but he was not supreme in any one of them.  There were
     better cricketers, better football players, better hands at setting a night-line, better
     swimmers than Clem, but he could do something, and do it well, in all these departments.  He
     generally took up a thing with much eagerness for a time, and then let it drop.  He was
     foremost in introducing new games and new fashions, which he permitted to flourish for a time,
     and then superseded.  As he grew up he displayed a taste for drawing and music.  He was soon
     able to copy little paintings of flowers, or even little country scenes, and to play a piece of
     no very great difficulty with tolerable effect.  But as he never was taught by a master, and
     never practised elementary exercises and studies, he was deficient in accuracy.  When the
     question came what was to be done with him after he left school, his father naturally wished
     him to go into the mill.  Clem, however, set his face steadily against this project, and his
     mother, who was a believer in his genius, supported him.  He actually wanted to go to the
     University, a thing unheard of in those days amongst our people; but this was not possible, and
     after dangling about for some time at home, he obtained the post of usher in a school, an
     occupation which he considered more congenial and intellectual than that of grinding flour. 
     Strange to say, although he knew less than any of his colleagues, he succeeded better than any
     of them.  He managed to impress a sense of his own importance upon everybody, including the
     headmaster.  He slid into a position of superiority above three or four colleagues who would
     have shamed him at an examination, and who uttered many a curse because they saw themselves
     surpassed and put in the shade by a stranger, who, they were confident, could hardly construct
     a hexameter.  He never quarrelled with them nor did he grossly patronise them, but he always
     let them know that he considered himself above them.  His reading was desultory; in fact,
     everything he did was desultory.  He was not selfish in the ordinary sense of the word.  Rather
     was he distinguished by a large and liberal open-handedness; but he was liberal also to himself
     to a remarkable degree, dressing himself expensively, and spending a good deal of money in
     luxuries.  He was specially fond of insisting on his half French origin, made a great deal of
     his mother, was silent as to his father, and always signed himself C. Leroy Butts, although I
     don’t believe the second Christian name was given him in baptism.  Notwithstanding his
     generosity he was egotistical and hollow at heart.  He knew nothing of friendship in the best
     sense of the word, but had a multitude of acquaintances, whom he invariably sought amongst
     those who were better off than himself.  He was popular with them, for no man knew better than
     he how to get up an entertainment, or to make a success of an evening party.  He had not been
     at his school for two years before he conceived the notion of setting up for himself.  He had
     not a penny, but he borrowed easily what was wanted from somebody he knew, and in a twelvemonth
     more he had a dozen pupils.  He took care to get the ablest subordinates he could find, and he
     succeeded in passing a boy for an open scholarship at Oxford, against two competitors prepared
     by the very man whom he had formerly served.  After this he prospered greatly, and would have
     prospered still more, if his love of show and extravagance had not increased with his income. 
     His talents were sometimes taxed when people who came to place their sons with him supposed
     ignorantly that his origin and attainments were what might be expected from his position; and
     poor Chalmers, a Glasgow M.A., who still taught, for £80 a year, the third class in the
     establishment in which Butts began life, had some bitter stories on that subject.  Chalmers was
     a perfect scholar, but he was not agreeable.  He had black finger-nails, and wore dirty
     collars.  Having a lively remembrance of his friend’s “general acquaintance” with Latin
     prosody, Chalmers’ opinion of Providence was much modified when he discovered what Providence
     was doing for Butts.  Clem took to the Church when he started for himself.  It would have been
     madness in him to remain a Dissenter.  But in private, if it suited his purpose, he could
     always be airily sceptical, and he had a superficial acquaintance, second-hand, with a
     multitude of books, many of them of an infidel turn.  I once rebuked him for his hypocrisy, and
     his defence was that religious disputes were indifferent to him, and that at any rate a man
     associates with gentlemen if he is a churchman.  Cultivation and manners he thought to be of
     more importance than Calvinism.  I believe that he partly meant what he said.  He went to
     church because the school would have failed if he had gone to chapel; but he was sufficiently
     keen-sighted and clever to be beyond the petty quarrels of the sects, and a song well sung was
     of much greater moment to him than an essay on pædo-baptism.  It was all very well of Chalmers
     to revile him for his shallowness.  He was shallow, and yet he possessed in some mysterious way
     a talent which I greatly coveted, and which in this world is inestimably precious—the talent of
     making people give way before him—a capacity of self-impression.  Chalmers could never have
     commanded anybody.  He had no power whatever, even when he was right, to put his will against
     the wills of others, but yielded first this way and then the other.  Clem, on the contrary,
     without any difficulty or any effort, could conquer all opposition, and smilingly force
     everybody to do his bidding.</t:p>
<t:p>Clem had a peculiar theory with regard to his own rights and those of the class to which he
     considered that he belonged.  He always held implicitly and sometimes explicitly that gifted
     people live under a kind of dispensation of grace; the law existing solely for dull souls. 
     What in a clown is a crime punishable by the laws of the land might in a man of genius be a
     necessary development, or at any rate an excusable offence.  He had nothing to say for the
     servant-girl who had sinned with the shopman, but if artist or poet were to carry off another
     man’s wife, it might not be wrong.</t:p>
<t:p>He believed, and acted upon the belief, that the inferior ought to render perpetual incense
     to the superior, and that the superior should receive it as a matter of course.  When his
     father was ill he never waited on him or sat up a single night with him.  If duty was
     disagreeable to him Clem paid homage to it afar off, but pleaded exemption.  He admitted that
     waiting on the sick is obligatory on people who are fitted for it, and is very charming. 
     Nothing was more beautiful to him than tender, filial care spending itself for a beloved
     object.  But it was not his vocation.  His nerves were more finely ordered than those of
     mankind generally, and the sight of disease and suffering distressed him too much.  Everything
     was surrendered to him in the houses of his friends.  If any inconvenience was to be endured,
     he was the first person to be protected from it, and he accepted the greatest sacrifices, with
     a graceful acknowledgment, it is true, but with no repulse.  To what better purpose could the
     best wine be put than in cherishing his imagination.  It was simple waste to allow it to be
     poured out upon the earth, and to give it to a fool was no better.  After he succeeded so well
     in the world, Clem, to a great extent, deserted me, although I was his oldest friend and the
     friend of his childhood.  I heard that he visited a good many rich persons, that he made much
     of them, and they made much of him.  He kept up a kind of acquaintance with me, not by writing
     to me, but by the very cheap mode of sending me a newspaper now and then with a marked
     paragraph in it announcing the exploits of his school at a cricket-match, or occasionally with
     a report of a lecture which he had delivered.  He was a decent orator, and from motives of
     business if from no other, he not unfrequently spoke in public.  One or two of these lectures
     wounded me a good deal.  There was one in particular on <t:hi>As You Like It</t:hi>, in which he
     held up to admiration the fidelity which is so remarkable in Shakespeare, and lamented that in
     these days it was so rare to find anything of the kind, he thought that we were becoming more
     indifferent to one another.  He maintained, however, that man should be everything to man, and
     he then enlarged on the duty of really cultivating affection, of its superiority to books, and
     on the pleasure and profit of self-denial.  I do not mean to accuse Clem of downright
     hypocrisy.  I have known many persons come up from the country and go into raptures over a
     playhouse sun and moon who have never bestowed a glance or a thought on the real sun and moon
     to be seen from their own doors; and we are all aware it by no means follows because we are
     moved to our very depths by the spectacle of unrecognised, uncomplaining endurance in a novel,
     that therefore we can step over the road to waste an hour or a sixpence upon the unrecognised,
     uncomplaining endurance of the poor lone woman left a widow in the little villa there.  I was
     annoyed with myself because Clem’s abandonment of me so much affected me.  I wished I could cut
     the rope and carelessly cast him adrift as he had cast me adrift, but I could not.  I never
     could make out and cannot make out what was the secret of his influence over me; why I was
     unable to say, “If you do not care for me I do not care for you.”  I longed sometimes for
     complete rupture, so that we might know exactly where we were, but it never came.  Gradually
     our intercourse grew thinner and thinner, until at last I heard that he had been spending a
     fortnight with some semi-aristocratic acquaintance within five miles of me, and during the
     whole of that time he never came near me.  I met him in a railway station soon afterwards, when
     he came up to me effusive and apparently affectionate.  “It was a real grief to me, my dear
     fellow,” he said, “that I could not call on you last month, but the truth was I was so driven:
     they would make me go here and go there, and I kept putting off my visit to you till it was too
     late.”  Fortunately my train was just starting, or I don’t know what might have happened.  I
     said not a word; shook hands with him; got into the carriage; he waved his hat to me, and I
     pretended not to see him, but I did see him, and saw him turn round immediately to some
     well-dressed officer-like gentleman with whom he walked laughing down the platform.  The rest
     of that day was black to me.  I cared for nothing.  I passed away from the thought of Clem, and
     dwelt upon the conviction which had long possessed me that I was <t:hi>insignificant</t:hi>, that
     there was <t:hi>nothing much in me</t:hi>, and it was this which destroyed my peace.  We may
     reconcile ourselves to poverty and suffering, but few of us can endure the conviction that
     there is <t:hi>nothing in us</t:hi>, and that consequently we cannot expect anybody to gravitate
     towards us with any forceful impulse.  It is a bitter experience.  And yet there is
     consolation.  The universe is infinite.  In the presence of its celestial magnitudes who is
     there who is really great or small, and what is the difference between you and me, my work and
     yours?  I sought refuge in the idea of GOD, the God of a starry night with its incomprehensible
     distances; and I was at peace, content to be the meanest worm of all the millions that crawl on
     the earth.</t:p>
</t:div>