<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER XX</head>
<head>THE BENEFACTOR</head>
<p>It was not till October that Captain Polkington was able to change the five pound note. This
     was really Julia's fault, she went so seldom into the town; he had once or twice suggested her
     doing so when she said they wanted this or that, but she never took the hint, and the note was
     still in his pocket-book. At last, however, the opportunity came.</p>
<p>A keeper's wife with whom Julia had got acquainted had promised her a pair of lop-eared
     rabbits if she could come and fetch them. She was not very anxious to have them, but Mr. Gillat
     was; he said they would be very profitable. Julia doubted this; but, since he wanted them, she
     said they would have them, and accordingly, one morning, they started together with a basket
     for the rabbits. They started directly after breakfast for they had to go a long way across the
     heath and could not at the best be back before two o'clock. Captain Polkington watched them go,
     standing at the cottage door until their figures were small on the great expanse of heather.
     Then he went in and, sitting down, wrote a hasty note to Julia; it was to the effect that he
     had been obliged to go into town, but would be back by dark or soon after. It read as quite a
     casual communication, as if he were in the habit of going into town frequently and had much
     business to transact. The Captain was rather satisfied with
     <pb n="317"/> it; he felt he was doing the straightforward thing in telling Julia, his whole
     proceedings were open and above board. When he came back he should tell her all about the
     money, how it had been raised and how spent. She should have had the spending of it herself if
     only she had gone to town when he suggested it; as it was, he must do it; it was absurd to wait
     any longer; the weather was already cold; he must go, and bring her some pleasant surprise when
     he came back.</p>
<p>Satisfied with these reflections and feeling already the glow of beneficence, he dressed
     himself and set out for Halgrave. He had to walk to the village and there take the carrier's
     cart which went into town twice a week; he reflected, while he waited for the vehicle, how
     fortunate it was that Julia and Johnny had chosen to go for the rabbits to-day, one of the days
     when the carrier went to town. There were a good many bundles going by the cart, and two other
     passengers who were inclined to be too familiar until somewhat haughtily shown their proper
     place. The Captain was a little annoyed by this; and annoyed, also, to find that the carrier
     was not in the habit of starting on the return journey till rather late, later than the note
     would lead Julia to expect her father. But as the carrier was not one to change his habits for
     anybody, that could not be helped and Captain Polkington made the best of it. Julia was not
     likely to be anxious about him, he was sure; and since he was going to tell her all about his
     doings, it might as well be late as early. By this time he had quite got rid of any qualms—if
     he ever had them—about the method of getting and the intention of spending the note. He had
     almost forgotten that it had not always been his, and was quite sure that he was doing the
     right thing—for others as well as himself—in the difficult circumstances which seemed to beset
     him more than the
     <pb n="318"/> common run of men. Cheered by these thoughts he endured the discomforts of the
     journey with moderate patience; he almost felt that he was suffering them in a good cause, for
     the sake of Johnny and Julia.</p>
<p>The town was large and the centre of a large district, not at all like the retired gentility
     of Marbridge, very much bigger and busier. Captain Polkington, who had lived quietly so long,
     felt rather lost and bewildered at first in the bustling intricate streets; there were so many
     people, especially among the shops, they were always getting in his way. He only made one
     purchase before lunch; he would have plenty of time in the afternoon, he thought, and would be
     better able to decide what to buy when he had seen things and had a meal. The purchase made
     before lunch was at the wine merchants, it was whisky.</p>
<p>He lunched at the best hotel; that and the whisky made a rather bigger hole in the five pound
     note than one would have expected. Still, as he told himself the whisky really was a vital
     matter with winter coming on, a necessity, not a luxury, for all of them—Johnny would be better
     for a little—he used to like a glass in the old days; and Julia would certainly be the better
     for it, working as she did in the cold. It was a medicine for them all, not himself alone. The
     lunch was the only personal extravagance and really, seeing what he was doing for the others,
     there was no need for him to grudge that to himself.</p>
<p>So he lunched and then the trouble began. He was not clear quite how it happened; at least,
     owing to the confusion there always was in his mind between facts as they were, as he wished
     them to be, and as they appeared in retrospect—he was never able to explain it thoroughly.
     There were other men lunching at the same time; he still had the Polkington faculty for making
     friends and ac
     <pb n="319"/>quaintances; he still, too, had the appearance and manner of a gentleman, if of
     somewhat reduced circumstances. He apparently made acquaintances; exactly how many and what
     sort is not certain, the account was very confused here. There was a whisky and soda in it, two
     whiskies and sodas, or even three; a cigar, a game of billiards—perhaps there was more than one
     game, or some other game besides billiards. At all events there must have been something more,
     for the Captain afterwards declared he was ruined in less than an hour, fleeced, cheated of his
     little all! It is quite possible that he was nothing of the kind, and that the acquaintances
     were perfectly honest and honourable men. They would not know he could not afford to lose, a
     true Polkington always set out to hide the reality of his poverty. And he was not likely to
     win, he seldom did, no matter at what he played or with whom; he was constitutionally
     unlucky—or incapable, which is a truer name for the same thing—it had always been so, even as
     far back as the old times in India. That day he lost at something, that at least was clear;
     then there was more whisky and soda and more losses, and perhaps more whisky again; and so on
     until late in the afternoon, he found himself standing, miserable and bewildered, in the main
     street of the town. Some one had brought him there, a good-natured young fellow who thought,
     not that he had spent all he ought, but that he had drunk all he should.</p>
<p>"Not used to it, you know," he had said with good-humoured apology; "been rusticating out of
     the way so long. Better come out and get a breath of air, it'll pull you together."</p>
<p>And he persuaded him out, walked some way down the street with him and then, seeing that he
     seemed all right, left him and went to attend to his own business.
     <pb n="320"/></p>
<p>For a little the Captain stood where he was, the depression, begotten of whisky and his
     losses, growing upon him in the old overwhelming way. No one took any notice of him; passers by
     jostled against him, for the pavement was rather narrow, but no one paid any attention to him.
     The bustle bewildered his weak head, and the noise and movement of the traffic in the roadway
     irritated him unreasonably. A youth ran into him and he exploded angrily with sudden weak
     unrestrained fury. Thereat the boy laughed, and, when he shouted and stamped his foot, ran away
     saying something impudent. The Captain turned to run after him shaking his stick; but he was
     stiff and rheumatic and weak on his legs, too, just now. It was no use to try and run. Of
     course it was no use, nothing was any use now, he was a miserable failure, he could not even
     run after a boy; he must bear every one's taunts; he could almost have wept in self-pity. Then
     he became aware that several passers by were looking at him curiously, arrested by the noise he
     had made. Annoyed and ashamed he turned his back on them and pretended to be examining the
     goods in a shop window near.</p>
<p>It was a large draper's, rather a cheap one; the better shops were higher up the street. In
     this one the things were all priced and labelled plainly; the Captain at first did not notice
     this one way or the other; he simply looked in to cover his confusion. But after a little he
     became aware of what he looked at, and it recalled to his mind the fact that he was going to
     buy something for Julia. He did not quite know what, he had had large ideas at one time; they
     had had to be diminished once because five pounds will not do as much as twenty; they had to be
     diminished again because he had been fleeced of so much of the five pounds. A wave of anger
     shook him as he
     <pb n="321"/> thought of that, but he suppressed it; he felt that he must not give way, so he
     looked steadily at the window. There were furs displayed there, muffs and collarettes of skunk
     and other animals, even the humble rabbit artistically treated to meet the insatiable female
     appetite for sable at all prices. The Captain decided on the best collarette displayed and
     turned towards the shop door feeling a little better in the glow of benevolence that returned
     to him as he thought of how much he was going to spend for Julia. Just as he was going in he
     caught sight of a girl selling violets in the street. She was a good-looking impudent girl, and
     catching his eye she pressed her wares on him glibly; he hesitated, smiled—here was one who
     treated him as a man, who considered it worth while. He looked defiantly at the passers by—he
     was a man, not an object for curiosity or kindly contempt. He returned the girl's glance with
     an ogle and, stepping as jauntily as he could to the edge of the pavement, took a bunch of
     flowers with some suitable pleasantry. Half-way through his remark he stopped dead; he had felt
     in his pocket for a penny and found nothing. Quickly, feverishly, almost desperately, he felt
     in the other pocket; there were three coins there; by the size he could tell that one at least
     was a penny; he took it out and gave it to the girl; he had not the courage to put down the
     flowers and go without them. Then he turned away. A narrow passage ran down between the
     draper's and the next house; fewer people went that way and in the window there, common and
     less expensive goods were displayed. The Captain went down the foot-way and examined the two
     remaining coins. They were a shilling and a penny.</p>
<p>People passed and repassed along the main road; carts and carriages rumbled over the uneven
     stones; no one heeded the shabby hopeless figure by the side window.
     <pb n="322"/> They were lighting up in the draper's though outside there was still daylight;
     the gas jets were considered to make the place look more attractive. They shone warmly on the
     furs and silk scarves in the front window, making them look rich and luxurious. Two girls
     stopped to look in; then, their means being more suitable to the goods there, they came to
     examine the side window. They were two servants out for the afternoon; they wore winter coats
     open over summer dresses and hats that might be called autumnal, seeing that they were an
     ingenious blending of the best that was left from the headgear of both seasons.</p>
<p>"I shall get one of them woolly neck things, I shall," one said; "they're quite as nice as
     fur and not so dear."</p>
<p>The other could not agree. "Don't care about them myself," she said; "I must say I like a bit
     of sable."</p>
<p>"Can't get it under two and eleven," her companion rejoined; "and those things are only a
     shilling three. Look at that pink one there; it looks quite as good as feathers any day. I'm
     not so gone on sable myself; you can't have it pink, and pink's my colour."</p>
<p>They moved on to another window; they, no more than the passers by, noticed the old man who
     stood just at their elbow. When they had gone he looked drearily in where they had looked.
     There were the woolly things they had spoken of, short woven strips of loopy wool, to be tied
     about the neck by the two-inch ribbons that dangled from the ends. "Ostrich wool boas in all
     colours, price, one shilling and three farthings," they were ticketed. He read the ticket
     mechanically. He still held his two coins; he held them mechanically; had he thought about it
     he would scarcely have troubled to do so, they were so cruelly, so mockingly inadequate. He
     read the ticket again; it obtruded itself upon him as trivial things do at
     <pb n="323"/> unexpected times. But now its meaning began to be impressed upon his brain—"one
     shilling and three farthings"—that, then, was the interpretation of the servant girl's
     "shilling three." He had a shilling and a penny—a shilling and three farthings. He could buy
     one of those ostrich wool boas—he would buy it—that pink one for Julia.</p>
<p>The Halgrave carrier made it a rule to receive his passengers' fares at the beginning of the
     expedition; if they were coming back as well as going with him they paid for the double journey
     at the outset in the morning. Captain Polkington had so paid, and it was that fact, coupled
     with the early arrival at the stables of his one purchase, which induced the carrier to wait
     nearly half-an-hour for him. The cart was packed, everything was ready, and the good man and
     the only other passenger he was taking back were growing impatient, when the Captain, carrying
     a small crushed paper parcel, appeared. He had lost his way to the stables and had wandered
     hopelessly in his efforts to find it. The carrier was rather short-tempered about it, and the
     other passenger said something to the effect that "They didn't oughter let him out alone!" The
     Captain payed no attention but climbed into the back of the cart and sat down near his whisky.
     The other passenger got up beside the driver, and in a few minutes they were lumbering down the
     crooked streets. Soon they were out of the town and jogging quietly along the quiet lanes; the
     driver leaned forward to get a light from his passenger's pipe; his face for a moment showed
     ruddy in the glow of the one lamp, then it sunk into gloom again. Captain Polkington did not
     notice; he did not notice the voices in intermittent talk, or the fume of their tobacco that
     hung on the moist air and mingled
     <pb n="324"/> with the scent of the drooping violets in his coat. He knew nothing and was aware
     of nothing except that he was the most miserable, the most unfortunate of men. Throughout the
     whole interminable journey he dwelt on that one thing as he sat by his whisky in the dark,
     clutching tightly the soft paper parcel and finding his only fragment of comfort in it. He had
     after all bought something; poor, disappointed, fleeced as he was, he had spent his last money
     in buying a present for his daughter.</p>
<p>
<pb n="325"/></p>
</div>