
CHAPTER XXII
THE LINE OF LEAST RESISTANCE
Julia was at work in the kitchen; it was ten o'clock on a November morning and she was busy;
     Captain Polkington had had breakfast up-stairs, he often did now, and it delayed the morning's
     work. Mr. Gillat brought in two letters which the postman had left; both were for Julia, but
     she had not time to read them now, so she put them down on the table; they would keep; she did
     not feel greatly interested to know what was inside them. Things did not interest her as they
     used; in some imperceptible way she had aged; some of the elasticity and youth was gone,
     perhaps because hope was gone. It had been dying all the summer, ever since the day when she
     crouched behind the chopping-block; but gently and gradually, as the year dies, with some
     beauties unknown in early days and little recurrent spurts of hope and youth, like the flowers
     that bloom into winter's lap. But it was dead now; there had come to her, as it were, a sudden
     frost, and, as befalls in the years, too, the late blooming flowers, the coloured leaves, the
     last beautiful clinging remnants of life withered all at once and fell away. It was
     unreasonable, perhaps, that the Captain's theft of the daffodil and what arose from it should
     have had this result; but then it was possibly unreasonable that hope and youth should have had
     any autumn at all and not died right off when she said "No" and meant it that after
     noon in the early summer. But then the mind of man—and woman—is unreasonable.
It was nearly half-an-hour later when Julia picked up the letters; both were from Holland;
     one, she fancied, was from Mijnheer, one from his son. She opened the latter first; she rather
     wondered what Joost could have to write about; he had acknowledged the receipt of the daffodil
     bulb long ago. The matter was soon explained; the letter was as formal and precise as ever, but
     the emotion that dictated it, the distress and regret, was quite clear to Julia in spite of the
     primness of expression. Clear, too, to her were the conflicting feelings that lay behind the
     lover's contrition for what he feared was abuse of his mistress's trust, and the grower's
     desire that the treasured token should be resolved into, what it was, a wonderful bulb, a
     triumph of the horticulturist. Julia smiled a little sadly as she read; not that she regretted
     the existence of the grower with the lover; she was glad to see it and to know that it was
     triumphing. But the whole affair seemed so far off, so unimportant, so almost childish. She did
     not care who knew he had the daffodil, or whether it bloomed or rotted. In these days, when her
     self-apportioned burden was beginning to press heavily upon her shoulders, such things did not
     seem to matter. She had a sense almost of disloyalty in feeling how little it mattered to her
     when it appeared to be so much to this loyal friend.
Captain Polkington had of late had several sudden attacks of a faintness which more often
     than not amounted to unconsciousness. "Heart," the doctor had said when he was summoned after
     the first one; he had not regarded them as very dangerous, that is to say not likely to prove
     fatal at any moment if properly treated at the time. He had given instructions as to suitable
     treatment, emphasis
     ing the fact that the patient ought never to be long out of ear-shot of some one,
     as the attacks required immediate remedy. He forbade excitement and much exertion, orders easy
     to fulfil in this case, and also stimulants of all sorts, an order not quite so easy. Captain
     Polkington was much displeased about this last; he said it plainly showed the doctor a fool who
     did not know his business; stimulant, as every one knew, being the first necessity for a weak
     heart. Julia pointed out that that must vary with the constitution, nature and disease; she
     also recalled the fact that alcohol never had suited her father. He was naturally not convinced
     by her logic, and so was decidedly sulky; even in time, by dint of dwelling upon the subject,
     came to regard the treatment as a conspiracy to annoy him. Julia regretted this but did not
     think it mattered very much, seeing that she had the keys; but then she did not know of that
     purchase made in the town. The Captain, rebelling against the doctor's order, hugged himself as
     he thought of it and of the comparatively sparing use he had made of it so far—for fear of
     being found out. There was no need of him to die by inches while he had that store of life and
     comfort; so he told himself, and secretly made use of it, with anything but good result. Julia,
     marking the disimprovement in his health, thought it was the natural course and saved him all
     work, carrying out the doctor's instructions more carefully than ever. The hidden whisky
     remained unknown to her, for although in the larger affairs of duplicity and diplomacy she
     easily outmatched her father, in matters requiring small cunning he was much nearer her equal.
     In this one he showed almost preternatural skill; his whole heart was in it, and his wits,
     where it was concerned, were sharpened above the average; he clung to his secret as a man
     clings to his one chance of life, made only the
      more pertinacious by the contrary advice he had received. But on that November
     morning, after Julia had brought her father round by the proper remedies, she began to have
     suspicions. They were not founded on anything definite; she could not imagine how he should
     have got stimulant, and his condition hardly justified her in suspecting it, yet she did. And
     Captain Polkington knew by experience that that was enough to prove unpleasant; it did not
     matter much at which end Julia got hold of his affairs, she had a knack of arriving at the
     middle before he was at all ready for her. He resented what she said to him that morning very
     much indeed. He denied everything and defended himself well; although he was in fear all the
     time that some unwary word or unwise denial should betray him to his cross-examiner who, being
     herself no mean expert in the double-dealing arts, could frequently learn as much from a lie as
     from the truth. In the end, what between anxiety and annoyance, he lost control of his temper
     and from peevish irritability broke out suddenly into a fit of weak ungovernable rage. Julia
     was obliged at once to desist, seeing with regret that she had transgressed one of the doctor's
     rules and excited the patient very much indeed.
She left him to recover control of himself and went to look for Mr. Gillat.
"Johnny," she said, when she found him. "I believe father has got whisky. I don't know where,
     but I shall have to find out; you must help me."
Johnny professed his willingness, looking puzzled and unhappy; he looked so at times, again
     now, for even he had begun to discern a shadow coming on the life which for a year had been so
     happy to him.
"You will have to keep a watch on father," Julia said. "He won't do much while I am watching;
     he will wait till
      he is alone with you. Don't try to prevent him; that is no good; just watch and
     tell me."
Mr. Gillat said he would, though he did not like the job, and certainly was ill-fitted for
     it. Julia knew that, but knew also that to discover anything she must depend a good deal upon
     him, unless she could by searching light upon the store of spirit which she could not help
     thinking her father had in or near the house. She determined to make a systematic search; but
     before she did so she found time to open Mijnheer's letter.
It was rather a long letter and very neat. It set forth in formal Dutch the old man's ideas
     concerning the daffodil bulb and his offer regarding it. It should be kept, he said, if it was
     paid for, not otherwise. Something now, she was to name her terms, while it was still uncertain
     whether its flower would be blue or streaked or even common yellow—more later, in accordance
     with the flowering and the profits likely to arise.
So Julia read and sat staring. An offer for "The Good Comrade." Money from the people to whom
     it had always practically belonged in her estimation. She could not take it from them, it was
     impossible; the thing was virtually their own! But if she did not. She re-read Joost's letter
     with its protestations, and Mijnheer's with its offer—if she did not, the little brown bulb
     would be sent back to her. Mijnheer, now that he knew of its coming, would insist on its return
     unless it were paid for; and Joost, she knew very well, would not deceive his father and keep
     it secretly, or defy his father and keep it openly; the money or the bulb she must have. And
     the bulb she could not, would not have again; so the money, unearned, distasteful, having a not
     too pleasant savour, must be hers. At last, in this way, without her contriv
     ance, against her will, there had come a way to pay the debt of honour!
She sat down and wrote to Mijnheer and named her price. Thirty pounds she asked for, no more
     in the future, no less now; that was the only price she could take for "The Good Comrade," it
     was the sum Rawson-Clew had paid to his cousin two years ago.
Johnny posted the letter that afternoon while Julia began her search for her father's hidden
     whisky.
All the afternoon Captain Polkington sat in the easy-chair, watching her contemptuously when
     she was in sight and moving uneasily when she was not. He did not think she would find
     anything, at least not at once, though he was afraid she would if she kept on long enough and
     he left his treasure in its present hiding-place. It would not last so much longer—he dared not
     contemplate the time when it should all be gone; it was characteristic of him that he was
     easily able to avoid doing so. The principal thought in his mind was a determination that it
     should not be found while any remained. That could not and should not happen; the last little
     which he had carefully hoarded, which he had stinted and deprived himself to save—to have that
     taken away, to be robbed of that—the tears gathered in his eyes at the pathos of the
     thought.
But the whisky was not found that day, and the Captain, who slept but badly at this time, lay
     awake long in the night planning how and when he could move it to a place of safety further
     away from the house. He would have gone down then and there, in spite of the fact that it was a
     blustering night of wind and rain and he not fitted to go out in such weather, but he was
     afraid of Julia. She was certain to hear and follow; she had almost an animal's alertness when
     once she was on the
      trail of anything. So he lay and planned and waited, hoping that a chance would
     come during the next day.
It did not. Julia was at home all day and, as she had foreseen, he made no move while she was
     about. But the following morning she had to go to Halgrave about the killing of a pig; Johnny
     was hardly equal to making the necessary arrangements and certainly could not do so good as
     she. Accordingly, she went herself, not very reluctantly, for she was nearly certain her father
     would make an effort to get at his whisky, if he had any, as soon as her back was turned, and
     so give Johnny a chance of finding out about it. Of course it was quite likely that Johnny,
     being Johnny, would miss the chance, but he might not, and even if he did they would not be
     much worse off than before. So she thought as she started, leaving the Captain, who was still
     in bed, with a very vague idea as to when she would be back.
He was a good deal annoyed by this vagueness; it meant he would have to hurry, a thing he
     hated and did very badly; and, perhaps, entirely without reason, too, for she might be three
     hours gone; though, equally of course, only two, or perhaps—she was capable of anything
     unpleasant and unexpected—only one. He began to dress as quickly as he could; but, owing to
     long habit of doing it as slowly as he could so as to postpone more arduous tasks, that was not
     very fast. He wished he had known sooner that Julia was going to Halgrave, he would have begun
     getting up before this; he would even have got to breakfast if only she had let him know; so he
     fumed to himself as he shuffled about, dropping things with his shaking fingers. At last he was
     dressed and came down-stairs to find Johnny, pink and apologetic as he used to be in the
     Marbridge days, laboriously doing odd jobs which did not need doing.
     
There was not a detective lost in Mr. Gillat, he had not the making of a sleuth-hound in him;
     or even a watch-dog, except, perhaps, of that well-meaning kind which gets itself perennially
     kicked for incessant and incurable tail wagging at inopportune times. The half-hour which
     followed Captain Polkington's coming down-stairs was a trying one. The Captain went to the back
     door to look out; Mr. Gillat followed him, though scarcely like his shadow; he was not
     inconspicuous, and neither he nor his motive were easy to overlook. The Captain said something
     approbious about the weather and the high wind and occasional heavy swishes of rain; then he
     went to the sitting-room which lay behind the kitchen, and near to the front door. Johnny
     followed him, and the Captain faced round on him, irritably demanding what the devil he
     wanted.
"To—to see if the register is shut," Mr. Gillat said, beaming at his own deep diplomacy and
     the brilliancy of the idea which had come to him—rather tardily, it is true, still in time to
     pass muster.
The Captain flung himself into a chair with a sigh of irritation. "It is a funny thing I
     can't be let alone a moment," he said. "I came in here for a little quiet and coolness, I
     didn't want you dodging after me."
"No," Johnny agreed amiably; "no, of course not." Then, after a long pause, as if he had just
     made sure of the fact, "It is cool in here."
It was, very; it might even have been called cold and raw, for there had not been a fire
     there for days, but the Captain did not move, and Johnny, stooping by the fire-place, examined
     the register of the chimney, fondly believing in his own impenetrable deceptiveness.
"I can't help thinking it ought to be shut," he observed,
      looking thoughtfully up the chimney; "the rain will come down; it might rain a
     good deal if the wind were to drop."
"The wind is not going to drop for hours," the Captain snapped; "it is getting higher."
A great gust rumbled in the chimney as he spoke, and flung itself with the thud of a palpable
     body against the window-pane. Mr. Gillat heard it; he could not well do otherwise. "Still," he
     said, "it might rain; one never knows."
He took hold of the register with the tongs and tried to shut it. It was obstinate, and he
     pulled this way and that, working in his usual laborious and conscientious way. At last it
     slipped and he managed to get it jammed crossways. Thus he had to leave it, for Captain
     Polkington, apparently cool enough now, wandered back into the kitchen.
Mr. Gillat, of course, followed and arranged and rearranged pots on the stove till the
     Captain said he had left his handkerchief up-stairs. Stairs were trying to his heart, so Johnny
     had to go for it. Up he went as fast as he could, and came down again almost faster, for he
     tumbled on the second step and slipped the rest of the way with considerable noise and
     bumping.
After that Captain Polkington gave up his efforts to get rid of his guard and resigned
     himself to fate. At least, so thought Mr. Gillat, who no amount of experience could instruct in
     the guilt of the human race in general and the Polkingtons in particular. The first hour of
     Julia's absence had passed when Johnny went into the back kitchen to clean knives. He left the
     door between the rooms open, but from habit more than from any thought of keeping an eye on his
     charge. They had been talking in the ordinary way for some time now, the Captain sitting so
     peacefully by the fire that Mr. Gillat had
      begun to forget he was supposed to watch. And really it would seem he was
     justified, for the Captain, of his own accord, left the easy-chair and followed him into the
     back kitchen, standing watching the knife-cleaning. He had been talking of old times, recalling
     far back incidents regretfully; he continued to do so as he watched Johnny at work until he was
     interrupted by a loud sizzling in the kitchen.
"Hullo!" he said, "there's a pot boiling over!" and he made as if he would go to it but half
     stopped. "It is the big one," he said, "perhaps you had better take it off; I'm not good at
     lifting weights now-a-days."
"No, no!" Johnny said hastily; "don't you do it, you leave it to me," and he hurried into the
     kitchen to take from the fire a pot which, had he only remembered it, had not been so near the
     blaze when he left it.
"It is too heavy for you," he went on as he lifted it; "I don't know what is inside, only
     water, I think; it will be all right here by the side."
A gust of wind swept round the kitchen, fluttering the herbs which hung from the ceiling and
     blowing the dust and flame from the front of the fire.
"Dear, dear!" Mr. Gillat exclaimed as he drew back, "What a wind!" Then, as he caught the
     whisper and whistle of the leafless things which whisper to one another out of doors even in
     the dead winter time, he realised that the outer door must be open.
"Shut it!" he said. "The latch is so old, it is beginning to get worn out, and the wind is so
     strong, too. Let me see if I can shut it." He went to the back kitchen for that purpose and
     found that he was talking to empty air, the Captain was gone.
In great consternation he went out after his charge. He had not had a minute's start; he
     could not have got
      far, not much more than round the corner of the house. So thought Mr. Gillat, and
     started round the nearest corner after him. Julia would not have done that; with the instinct
     of the wild animal and the rogue for cover, and for the value of the obvious in concealment,
     she would have looked by the water butt first. It was not a hiding-place; the bush beside did
     not half conceal Captain Polkington, yet he stood dark and unobtrusive against it and so close
     to the door that in looking out for him one naturally looked beyond him. As Johnny went round
     one side of the house the Captain left the meagre shelter of the butt and went round the other,
     bent now on finding some better hiding-place till it should be safe for him to go to his
     precious store. And seeing that he was braced by an insatiable whisky thirst and so possessed
     by one idea that he had almost a madman's cunning in achieving his purpose, it is not wonderful
     that he succeeded. While Johnny hastily searched the out-buildings he lay hid. And when at last
     Mr. Gillat went back to the house, being convinced that his charge must have gone back before
     him, he, nerved and strengthened by a dose of the precious spirit, carefully climbed over the
     garden wall, carrying with him all that was left of his store. It was rather heavy, and the
     rising wind was strong, but he was strong, too, and he bore more strength with him. He could
     carry a weight and fight with the wind if he wanted to; his heart was well enough when it was
     properly treated. And it should be properly treated as long as he had his comfort, his precious
     medicine safe and in a place where prying hands could not touch it.
Julia came home from Halgrave later than she expected, but the wind had increased to a gale,
     so that walking along the exposed road had been no easy matter.
      Johnny by this time was almost desperate with alarm, for Captain Polkington had
     not come back and, in spite of a continuous search in likely and unlikely places, he had not
     been able to find any trace of him or his whisky. It is true his search was not very systematic
     at the best of times; it is not likely to have been now; as his alarm increased, it grew worse,
     until, by the time Julia came in, it had become little more than a repeated looking in the same
     unlikely places and an incessant toiling up and down-stairs and across the garden in the
     howling wind.
His account of the Captain's vanishing was much obscured by self-condemnation and anxiety,
     still she managed to make it out and she did not at first think so very seriously of it. She
     concluded from it that her father had succeeded in getting at his whisky and Johnny had failed
     to prevent him or find out the whereabouts of the store—a not very astonishing occurrence. The
     fact that the Captain had not returned or shown himself for so long was surprising and to be
     regretted, seeing the badness of the weather. But it was not inexplicable; he might be anxious
     to demonstrate his freedom, or, by frightening them, to pay them out for the watch lately kept
     on him; or—and this was the one serious aspect of the matter—he might have taken more of the
     spirit than he could stand in his weak state and be too stupid and muddled to come back alone.
     Julia reassured Johnny as well as she could, and then, accompanied by him, set to work to
     search thoroughly the house, garden and out-buildings.
It was dinner time before they had finished. Julia came to the doorway of the bulb shed
     uneasy and perplexed. "It is clear he is not here," she said, and turned to fasten the door. A
     gust of wind tore it from her hand, flinging it back noisily. She caught it again and secured
      it. "It is dinner time," she said; "come along indoors, there is no reason why
     you should go hungry because father chooses to."
Johnny followed her to the house. When they were indoors he said, "Do you think—you don't
     think he has had an attack?—that he is lying unconscious somewhere?" That was precisely what
     Julia was beginning to think; there seemed no other possible explanation. Johnny read her mind
     in her face and was overwhelmed with the sense of his own shortcomings and their possible
     consequences.
"It is not your fault," Julia assured him; "you might as well say it is father's for being so
     foolish and obstinate about his whisky—a great deal better and more truly say it is mine for
     leaving you, and for driving him into this corner, for not having managed the whole thing
     better."
Johnny, though a little relieved that she did not think him to blame, was not comforted. "Let
     us go and find him," he said; "we must find him; never mind about dinner—we must go and look
     for him—though I don't know where."
"We must look beyond the garden," Julia said; "he must have got further than we first
     thought—but I don't see how he can be far in this weather. Cut some cheese and bread; we can
     eat it as we go along."
In a little while they set out together, Julia taking restoratives with her, though she was
     also careful to leave some on the kitchen-table in case Captain Polkington should make his way
     back and feel in need of them in her absence. Outside the garden wall one felt the force of the
     wind more fully, and realised how impossible it was that the Captain should have gone far.
     Julia stood a moment by the gate. Before her lay the road to Halgrave; her father might have
     gone down it a little way; but if he had he must have turned off and sought conceal
     ment somewhere for she had seen no sign of any one when she came home. To the left
     stretched the heath-land, brown and bare, to the belt of wildly tossing pines; it was hard to
     imagine her father choosing that way. To the right lay the sandhills, a place of unsteady
     outline, earth and sky alike pale and blurred as the north-west wind fled seawards, lifting and
     whirling the fine particles till the air seemed full of them; it was impossible to think of any
     one choosing that way.
"We will go down the road to begin with," Julia said, and started.
All through the early part of the afternoon they searched; sometimes stopped for a moment by
     a gust of wind; Julia caught and whirled, Johnny brought to a panting standstill. But on again
     directly, struggling down the road, looking in ditches and behind scant bushes, leaving the
     track first on the right hand then on the left, searching in likely and unlikely places. But
     always with the same result, there was no sign of the missing man. At last, when they had
     reached a greater distance than it was possible to imagine the Captain could have gone, they
     turned towards the house across the heath. It was difficult to think of the Captain going that
     way, seeing he would have been walking in the teeth of the wind, but it almost seemed he must
     have done it.
The short day was already beginning to close in when they reached the belt of pines. It had
     grown much colder; one could almost believe there would be frost in the air by and by. The wind
     was lulling a little; it still roared with strange rushings and half-demented tearings at the
     tree-tops, almost like some great spirit prisoned there, but it had spent its first strength.
     The rain clouds were going, too; already in places the sky was swept clear so that a pale light
     gleamed behind the trees.
     
Julia stood in the vibrant shelter of the pines, pushing back her hair; she was bareheaded; a
     hat had been an impossible superfluity when she started out.
"Johnny," she said, "we have come too far; father could not have got to the trees in such
     weather as it was when he started; we must go back. I expect he is somewhere nearer home; we
     have not half searched the possible radius yet."
Johnny said "Yes." He was dog-tired, so tired that his anxiety was now little more than dull
     despair animated by an unquestioning determination to continue the search.
He would have done so somehow, and with his flagging energies been more hindrance than help,
     had not Julia prevented him; as they neared the house, now almost merged in the dusk, she
     said—
"I am going to fetch a lantern; the moon will be up soon, but until then I shall want a
     light. I am just coming in to get it, then I shall go out again; but you must stop at home;
     father may come back, and if he found us both out after dark he would think something was wrong
     and start to look for us; then we should be worse off than ever."
Johnny said "Yes"; but suggested, "I think we'd better look round about the house once more.
     I think I'll take a light and look round again."
Julia did not think it would be much use; however she consented, though she had to go with
     Johnny; she did not trust him with a lantern among the out-buildings. They looked round once
     more, in the sheds and in the dark garden; afterwards they went out and looked beyond the wall
     all round, on the side where the heather grew and also on the side where the loose sand came
     close. It took time; Johnny was too tired to move quickly or
      even to understand quickly what was said to him. At last Julia stopped and spoke
     decisively.
"You had better go in now," she said; "it won't do for us both to be out any longer; one of
     us must go in, and I think it had better be you. Make a good fire, see that there is plenty of
     hot water and get something to eat so as to be ready to do things when I come back."
Johnny acquiesced and Julia, having watched him into the house, took up her lantern and set
     out in the direction of the sandhills.
It was her last resource; it did not seem to her likely that her father could have gone
     there; at the best of times he disliked the place, finding it very tiring. Still, with the wind
     behind him as it would have been this morning, it is possible he would have found it the
     easiest way—if he could have managed to forget what the coming back would be. At all events she
     determined to try it, so she set out for the waste.
By this time the moon was rising, and, in spite of the driving clouds which had not all
     dispersed, at times it shone clear. Beneath it the stretch of sand lay pale and desolate, a
     new-formed landscape of fresh contours, loosely-piled hills and shallow scooped hollows shaped
     by to-day's wind. An easy place for a man to miss his way with a gale blowing and the sand
     dancing blinding reels. A hard place for a man to travel far when he had to face the wind; a
     strong man would have found it very tiring, a weak man might well have given it up, driven to
     waiting for a lull in the weather. As for a man in the Captain's health—when Julia thought of
     it she hurried on, although she knew if her father had to-day, as he had all through his life,
     followed the line of least resistance, the chances were that her help would be of little avail
     to him now.
She carried her lantern low, looking carefully for foot
     prints; soon, however, she put it out; she would do better without in the
     increasing moon-light. But she found no prints; after all, as she remembered, she was hardly
     likely to; the wind and blowing sand would have obliterated them. Over the first level of sand
     she went to the nearest rise without seeing anything; up to that and down the following hollow,
     looking in every curve and indentation, still without seeing anything. Then she began to climb
     the next rise. The moon was struggling through a long cloud, one moment eclipsed, the next
     shining with a half radiance which made the landscape unevenly black and white. For a second it
     looked out clear, and the sand showed like silver, tear-spotted with ink in the hollows; then
     the cloud swept up and all turned to a level grey. She had climbed to the top of a rise by now,
     sinking deep and noiseless into the soft sand. It was too dark to see what was below; all was
     shadow, black shadow—or was it a blackness more substantial than shadow?
The cloud passed from off the moon's face, the light shone out once more, turning the sand to
     silver. All the great empty space, where the dying wind still throbbed, was white silver,
     except down in the hollow where, black and still, lay the man who had followed the line of
     least resistance.


