
CHAPTER XIV
THE END OF THE CAMPAIGN
The great Polkington campaign was over and it had failed. Mrs. Polkington and Chèrie cheered
     each other with assurances of a contrary nature as long as they could, but for all that it had
     really failed and they knew it. There had been some small successes by the way; they had
     received a little recognition in superior places, and a few, a very few, invitations of a
     superior order at the cost, of course, of refusing and so offending some old friends and
     acquaintances. It might perhaps have been possible to achieve the position at which Mrs.
     Polkington aimed in the course of time, or a very long time; society in the country moves
     slowly, and she could not afford to wait indefinitely; her financial ability was not equal to
     it. Moreover, there came into her affairs, not exactly a crash, but something so unpleasantly
     like a full stop that she and Chèrie could not fail to perceive it. This occurred on the day
     when they heard of Mr. Harding's engagement. Mr. Harding was the eligible bachelor addition to
     county society whose advent had materially assisted in giving definite form to Mrs.
     Polkington's ambition. He had helped to feed it, too, during the late summer and early autumn,
     for he had been friendly, though Chèrie was forced to admit that his attentions to her had not
     been very marked. But now the news was abroad that he was engaged to a girl in his own circle;
      one whose mother had not yet extended any greater recognition to Mrs. Polkington
     than an invitation to a Primrose League Fête.
This news was abroad in the middle of October, and there was a certain amount of unholy
     satisfaction in Marbridge. Some of the old friends and acquaintances who Mrs. Polkington had
     offended, recognised the Christian duty of forgiveness, and called upon her—to see how she bore
     up. The Grayson girls, whose dance Chèrie had refused at the beginning of the month, came to
     see her. But they put off their call a day to suit some theatrical rehearsal; by which means
     they lost the entertainment they promised themselves, for by the time they did come Chèrie was
     ready for them and, with appropriate shyness, let it be known that she herself was engaged to
     Mr. Brendon Smith.
At this piece of information the girls looked at one another, and neither of them could think
     of anything smart to say. Afterwards they told each other and their friends that it was "quick
     work," and "like those Polkingtons." But at the time they could only offer suitable
     congratulations to Chèrie, who received them and carried off the situation with a charming
     mingling of assurance and graciousness, which was worthy of her mother.
But the Graysons were right in saying it was quick work; late one afternoon Chèrie heard of
     Mr. Harding's engagement; during the evening she and her mother recognised their failure; in
     the night she saw that Mr. Brendon Smith was her one chance of dignified withdrawal, and before
     the next evening she had promised to marry him.
There were some people in Marbridge who pitied Mr. Smith (only the Polkingtons put in the
     Brendon), but he did not need much pity, for the good reason that he
      knew very well what he was doing and how it was that his proposals came to be
     accepted. He was fond of Chèrie, and appreciated both her beauty and her several valuable
     qualities; but he had no illusions about her or her family, and he knew, when he made it, that
     his proposal would be accepted to cover a retreat. He was not at all a humble and diffident
     individual, but he did not mind being taken on these terms; he even saw some advantage in it in
     dealing with the Polkingtons. If there was any mistake in the matter it was Chèrie when she
     said "Yes" to his suggestion, "Don't you think you'd better marry me?" She probably did not
     know how completely she was getting herself a master.
It was not a grand engagement; Mrs. Polkington could not pretend that her son-in-law elect
     had aristocratic or influential connections; she said so frankly—and her frankness, which was
     overstrained, was one of her most engaging characteristics.
"It is no use pretending that I should not have been more pleased if he had been better
     connected," she said to those old friends and acquaintances whose Christianity led them to
     call. "I share your opinion, dear Mrs. ——" (the name varied according to circumstances) "about
     the value of birth; but one can't have everything; he is a most able man, and really charming.
     It is such a good thing that he is so much older than Chèrie; I always felt she needed an older
     man to guide and care for her—he is positively devoted to her; you know, the devotion of a man
     of that age is such a different thing from a boy's affection."
After that the visitor could not reasonably do anything but inquire if Mr. Smith was going to
     throw up the South African post which all the town knew he was about to take before his engagement.
     
To this Mr. Polkington was obliged to answer, "No, he is going, and going almost directly;
     that is my one hardship; I have got to lose Chèrie at once, for he positively will not go
     without her. Of course, it would be a thousand pities for him to throw it up, such an opening;
     so very much better than he would ever have here, but it is hard to lose my child—she seems a
     child to me still—almost before I have realised that she is grown up. Their passages are taken
     already; they will be married by license almost directly; there even won't be time to get a
     trousseau, only the merest necessaries before the luggage has to go."
It must not be thought that the news of Mr. Harding's engagement was the one and only thing
     which convinced Mrs. Polkington and Chèrie that the great campaign had failed; it was the
     finishing touch, no doubt, in that it had made Chèrie feel the necessity of being immediately
     engaged to some one, but there were other things at work. Captain Polkington had returned from
     London just five days before they heard the news, and three were quite sufficient to show his
     wife and daughter that he was considerably the worse for his stay in town. Bills too, had been
     coming in of late; not inoffensive, negligible bills such as they were very well used to, but
     threatening insistent bills, one even accompanied by a lawyer's letter. Then, to crown all,
     Captain Polkington had a fit of virtue and repentance on the second day after his return. It
     was not of long duration, and was, no doubt, partly physical, and not unconnected with the
     effects of his decline from the paths of temperance. But while it lasted, he read some of the
     bills and talked about the way ruin stared him in the face and the need there was for
     retrenchment, turning over a new leaf, facing facts and kindred things. Also, which was more
     important, he wrote to his wife's banker
      brother—he who had been instrumental in getting the papers sent in years ago. To
     this influential person he said a good deal about the state of the family finances, the need
     there was for clearing matters up and starting on a better basis, and his own determination to
     face things fairly and set to work in earnest. What kind of work was not mentioned; apparently
     that had nothing to do with the Captain's resolution; there was one thing, however, that was
     mentioned definitely—the need for the banker brother's advice—and pecuniary assistance. The
     answer to this letter was received on the same day as the news of Mr. Harding's engagement. It
     came in the evening, later than the news, and it was addressed to Mrs. Polkington, not the
     Captain; it assisted her in recognising that the end of the campaign had arrived. It said
     several unpleasant things, and it said them plainly; not the most pleasant to the reader was
     the announcement that the writer would himself come to Marbridge to look into matters one day
     that week or the next. Under these circumstances it is not perhaps so surprising that Chèrie
     found it advisable to accept Mr. Brendon Smith's offer of marriage, and Mrs. Polkington found
     the impossibility of getting a trousseau in time no very great disadvantage.
When Julia came home it wanted but a short time to Chèrie's wedding. A great deal seemed to
     have happened since she went away, not only to her family, but, and that was less obviously
     correct, to herself. She stood in the drawing-room on the morning after her return and looked
     round her and felt that somehow she had travelled a long way from her old point of view. The
     room was very untidy; it had not been used, and so, in accordance with the Polkington custom,
     not been set tidy for two days; dust lay thick on everything; there were dead leaves in the
     vases, cigarette ash on the table, no coals on the
      half-laid fire. In the merciless morning light Julia saw all the deficiencies;
     the way things were set best side foremost, though, to her, the worst side contrived still to
     show; the display there was everywhere, the trumpery silver ornaments, all tarnished for want
     of rubbing, and of no more intrinsic value and beauty than the tinfoil off champagne bottles;
     the cracked pieces of china—rummage sale relics, she called them—set forth in a glass-doored
     cabinet, as if they were heirlooms. Mrs. Polkington had a romance about several of them that
     made them seem like heirlooms to her friends and almost to herself. The whole, as Julia looked
     around, struck her as shoddy and vulgar in its unreality.
"I'm not coming back to it, no, I'm not," she said, half aloud; "the corduroy and onions
     would be a great deal better."
Chèrie passed the open door at that minute and half heard her. "What did you say?" she
     asked.
Julia looked round. "Nothing," she answered, "only that I am not coming back to this sort of
     life."
"To Marbridge?" Chèrie asked, "or to the house? If it is the house you mean, you need not
     trouble about that; there isn't much chance of your being able to go on living here; you will
     have to move into something less expensive. I am sure Uncle William will insist on it. There is
     more room than you will want here after I am gone, and as for appearance and society, there
     won't be much object in keeping that up."
Julia laughed. "You don't think I am a sufficiently marketable commodity to be worth much
     outlay?" she said. "You are quite right; besides, it is just that which I mean; I have come to
     the conclusion that I don't admire the way we live here."
"So have I," Chèrie answered; "no one in their senses
      would; but it was the best we could do in the circumstances and before you
     grumble at it you had better be sure you don't get something worse."
Julia did not think she should do that, and Chèrie seeing it went on, "Oh, of course you have
     got £50 a year, I know, but you can't live on that; besides, I expect Uncle William will want
     you to do something else with it."
"I shall do what I please," Julia replied, and Chèrie never doubted it; she would have done
     no less herself had she been the fortunate legatee, Uncle William or twenty Uncle Williams
     notwithstanding.
This important relative had not been to Marbridge yet, in spite of what he wrote to his
     sister; he had not been able to get away. Indeed, he was not able to do so until the day after
     Chèrie's wedding. Mrs. Polkington was in a happy and contented frame of mind; the quiet wedding
     had gone off quite as well as Violet's grander one—really, a quiet wedding is more effective
     than a smart one in the dull time of year, and always, of course, less expensive. Chèrie had
     looked lovely in simple dress, and the presents, considering the quietness and haste, were
     surprisingly numerous and handsome. Mr. Smith was liked and respected by a wide circle. Mrs.
     Polkington felt satisfied and also very pleased to have Violet, her favourite daughter, with
     her again. She and Violet were talking over the events of the day with mutual congratulation,
     when Mr. William Ponsonby was announced.
Fortunately, Violet's husband, Mr. Frazer, had gone to see his old friend the vicar, and more
     fortunately still, he was persuaded to stay and dine with him. It would have been rather
     awkward to have had him present at the display of family washing which took place that evening.
     Mr. Ponsonby did not mince matters; he said, perhaps
      not altogether without justice, that he had had about enough of the Polkingtons.
     He also said he wanted the truth, and seeing that his sister had long ago found that about her
     own concerns so very unattractive that she never dealt with it naked; it did not show beautiful
     now. In the course of time, however, he got it, or near enough for working purposes. Out came
     all the bills, and out came the threatening letter and old account books and remembered debts
     both of times past and present; and when he had got them all, he added them up, showed Mrs.
     Polkington the total, and asked her what she was going to do.
She said she did not know; privately she felt there was no need for her to consider the
     question; was it not the one her self-invited brother had come to answer? He did answer it,
     almost as soon as he asked it.
"You will have to leave this house," he said, "sell what you can of its contents and pay all
     that is possible of your debts. You won't be able to pay many with that; the rest I shall have
     to arrange about, I suppose. Oh, not pay; don't think that for a moment; I've paid a deal more
     than I ought for you long ago. I mean to see the people and arrange that you pay by degrees;
     you will have to devote most of your income to that for a time. What will you live on in the
     meanwhile? This legacy—it is you who have got it, isn't it?" he said, turning to Julia; "I
     thought so. Fortunately the money is not in any way tied up, you can get at the principal.
     Well, the best thing to be done is to buy a good boarding-house. You could make a
     boarding-house pay, Caroline," he went on to his sister, "if you tried; your social gifts would
     be some use there—you will have to try."
Mrs. Polkington looked a little dismayed, and Violet said, "It would be rather degrading,
     wouldn't it?"
     
"Not so degrading as being sued at the county court," her uncle returned.
Mrs. Polkington felt there was truth in that, and, accustoming herself to a new idea with her
     usual rapidity, she even began to see that the alternative offered need not be so very
     unpleasant. Indeed, when she came to think about it, it might be almost pleasant if the
     boarding-house were very select; there would be society of a kind, perhaps of a superior kind,
     even; she need not lose prestige and she could still shine, and without such tremendous
     effort.
But her reflections were interrupted by the Captain.
"And what part have I in this scheme?" he asked.
His brother-in-law, to whom the question was addressed, considered a moment. "Well, I really
     don't know," he said at last; "of course you would live in the house."
"A burden on my wife and daughter! Idle, useless, not wanted!"
The banker had no desire to hurt Captain Polkington's feelings, but he saw no reason why he
     should not hear the truth—that he had long been all these things; idle, useless, unwanted, a
     burden not only to his wife and daughters, but also to all relations and connections who
     allowed themselves to be burdened. But the Captain's feelings were hurt; he was surprised and
     injured, though convinced of little besides the hardness of fate and the fact that his
     brother-in-law misunderstood him. He turned to his wife for support, and she supported,
     corroborating both what he said and what her brother did too, though they were diametrically
     opposed. It looked rather as if the discussion were going to wander off into side issues, but
     Julia brought it back by inquiring of her uncle
     —
"What part have I in this scheme?"
"You will help your mother," he answered, "and of course the concern will be nominally yours;
     that is to say, you will put your money in it, invest it in that instead of railways or
     whatever it is now in. I shall see that the thing is properly secured."
He glanced at Captain Polkington as he spoke, as if he thought he might have designs upon the
     money or investment. Julia only said, "I see," but in so soft a voice that she roused Mr.
     Ponsonby's suspicions. He had dealt a good deal with men and women, and he did not altogether
     like the amused observing eyes of the legatee, and he distrusted her soft voice of seeming
     acquiescence.
"It is of no use for you to get any nonsensical ideas," he said, "about what you will do and
     won't do; this is the only thing you can do; you have got to make a living, and you have got to
     pay your debts; beggars can't be choosers. The fact is, you have all lived on charity so long
     that you have got demoralised."
Violet flushed. "Really," she began to say, "though you have helped us once or twice, I don't
     think you have the right to insult—" but Mrs. Polkington raised a quieting hand; she did not
     wish to offend her brother.
He was not offended; he only spoke his mind rather plainly to them all, which, though it did
     no harm, did little good either; they were too old in their sins to profit by that now. After
     some more unpleasant talk all round, the family conclave broke up; Mr. Frazer came home, and
     every one went to bed.
Mr. Ponsonby had Julia's tiny room; there was nowhere else for him, seeing Violet and her
     husband had the one she and her youngest sister shared in their maiden days. Julia had to
     content herself with the drawing-room sofa; it was a very uncomfortable sofa, and the blankets
      kept slipping off so she did not sleep a great deal; but that did not matter
     much; she had the more time to think things over. Dawn found her sitting at the table wrapped
     in her blanket, writing by the light of one of the piano candles; she glanced up as the first
     cold light struggled in, and her face was very grave, it looked old, too, and tired, with the
     weariness which accompanies renunciation, quite as often as does peace or a sense of beatitude.
     She looked at the paper before her, a completely worked-out table of expenditure, a sort of
     statement of ways and means—the means being £50 a year. It could be done; she knew that during
     the night when the plan took shape in her mind; she had proved it to herself more than
     half-an-hour ago by figures—but there was no margin. It could only be done by renouncing that
     upon which she had set her heart; she could not work out the scheme and pay the debt of honour
     to Rawson-Clew. The legacy had at first seemed a heaven-sent gift for that purpose, but now,
     like the blue daffodil, it seemed that it could not be used to pay the debt. That was not to be
     paid by a heaven-sent gift any more than by a devil-helped theft; slow, honest work and patient
     saving might pay it in years, but nothing else it seemed. She put her elbows on the table and
     propped her chin on her locked hands looking down at the unanswerable figures, but they still
     told her the same hard truth.
"I might save it in time; I could do without this—and this," she told herself. It is so easy
     to do without oneself when one's mind is set on some purpose, but one has no right to expect
     others to do without, too—the whole thing would be no good if the others had to; she knew that.
     No, the debt could not be paid this way; she had no right to do it; it was her own fancy, her
     hobby, perhaps. No one demanded that it should be paid; law did
      not compel it; Rawson-Clew did not expect it; her father considered that it no
     longer existed; it was to please herself and herself alone that she would pay it, and her
     pleasure must wait.
Possibly she did not reason quite all this; she only knew that she could not do what she had
     set her heart on doing with the first of Aunt Jane's money, and the renunciation cost her much,
     and gave her no satisfaction at all. But the matter once decided, she put it at the back of her
     mind, and by breakfast time she was her usual self; to tell the truth, she was looking forward
     to a skirmish with Uncle William, and that cheered her.
After breakfast she led Mr. Ponsonby to the drawing-room, and he came not altogether
     unprepared for objections; he had half feared them last night.
"Uncle William," she said. "I have been thinking over your plan, and I don't think I quite
     like it."
"I dare say not," her uncle answered; "I can believe it; but that's neither here nor there,
     as I said last night, beggars can't be choosers."
Julia did not, as Violet had, resent this; she was the one member of the family who was not a
     beggar, and she knew perfectly well she could be a chooser. She sat down. "Perhaps I had better
     say just what I mean," she said pleasantly; "I am not going to do it."
"Not going to?" Mr. Ponsonby repeated indignantly. "Don't talk nonsense; you have got to,
     there's nothing else open to you; I'm not going to keep you all, feed, clothe and house you,
     and pay your debts into the bargain!"
"No," said Julia; "no, naturally not; I did not think of that."
"What did you think of, then?" her uncle demanded; he remembered that she had the nominal
     disposal of her
      own money, and though her objections were ridiculous, even impertinent in the
     family circumstances, they might be awkward. "What do you object to? I suppose you don't like
     the idea of paying debts; none of you seem to."
"No," Julia answered; "it isn't that; of course the debts must be paid in the way you say, it
     is the only way."
"I am glad you think so," the banker said sarcastically; "though I may as well tell you,
     young lady, that it would still be done even without your approval. What is it you don't like,
     spending your money for other people?"
Julia smiled a little. "We may as well call it that," she said; "I don't like the
     boarding-house investment."
"What do you like? Seeing your parents go to the poorhouse? That's what will happen."
"No, they can come and live with me. I have got a large cottage, a garden, a field, and £50 a
     year. If we keep pigs and poultry, and grow things in the garden we can live in the cottage on
     the £50 a year till the debts are all paid off; after that, of course, we should have enough to
     be pretty comfortable. We need not keep a servant there, or regard appearances or humbug—it
     would be very cheap."
"And nasty," her uncle added. He was not impressed with the wisdom of this scheme; indeed he
     did not seriously contemplate it as possible. "You are talking nonsense," he said; "absurd,
     childish nonsense; you don't know anything about it; you have no idea what life in a cottage
     means; the drudgery of cooking and scrubbing and so on; the doing without society and the
     things you are used to; as for pigs and gardening, why, you don't know how to dig a hole or
     grow a cabbage!"
But he was not quite right; Julia had learnt something about drudgery in Holland, something
     about growing things, at least in theory, and so much about doing with
     out the society to which she was used at home that she had absolutely no desire
     for it left. She made as much of this plan to Mr. Ponsonby as was possible and desirable;
     enough, at all events, to convince him that she had thought out her plan in every detail and
     was very bent on it.
"I suppose the utter selfishness of this idea of yours has not struck you," he said at last.
     "You may think you would like this kind of life, though you wouldn't if you tried it, but how
     about your mother?"
"She won't like it," Julia admitted; "but then, on the other hand, there is father. I suppose
     you know he has taken to drink lately and at all times gambled as much as he could. What do you
     think would become of him in a boarding-house in some fashionable place, with nothing to do,
     and any amount of opportunity?"
Mr. Ponsonby did not feel able or willing to discuss the Captain's delinquencies with his
     daughter; his only answer was, "What will become of your mother keeping pigs and poultry and
     living in an isolated cottage? It would be social extinction for her."
"The boarding-house would be moral extinction for father."
Mr. Ponsonby grew impatient. "I suppose you think," he said irritably, "that you have reduced
     it to this—the sacrifice of one parent or the other. You have no business to think about such
     things; but if you had, to which do you owe the most duty? Who has done the most for you?"
"Well," Julia answered slowly, "I'm not sure I am considering duty only; people who don't pay
     their debts are not always great at duty, you know. Perhaps it is really inclination with me.
     Father is fonder of me than mother is; I have never been much of a social success. Mother
      did not find me such good material to work upon, so naturally she rather dropped
     me for the ones who were good material. I admire mother the more, but I am sorrier for father,
     because he can't take care of himself, and has no consolation left; it serves him right, of
     course, but it must be very uncomfortable all the same. Do you see?"
"No, I don't," her uncle answered shortly; "I am old-fashioned enough to think sons and
     daughters ought to do their duty to their parents, not analyse them in this way." He forgot
     that he had in a measure invited this analysis, and Julia did not remind him, although no doubt
     she was aware of it.
"I should like to do my duty to them both," she said; "and I believe I will do it best by
     going to the cottage. Father would get to be a great nuisance to mother at the boarding-house
     after a time, almost as bad as the pigs and poultry at the cottage. Also, if we had the
     boarding-house, father's moral extinction would be complete, but if we lived at the cottage
     mother's social one would not; she could go and stay with Violet and other people the worst
     part of the time, while we were shortest of money. Besides all that, there are two other
     things; I like the cottage best myself, and I believe it to be the best—I know the sort of
     living life we should live at a boarding-house—and then there is Johnny Gillat."
Mr. Ponsonby had no recollection of who Johnny Gillat was, and he did not trouble to ask;
     Julia's other reason was the one he seized upon. "You like it!" he said; "yes, now we have come
     to the truth; the person you are considering is yourself; I knew that all along; you need not
     have troubled to wrap it up in all these grand reasons—consideration for your father, and so on!"
     
"Oh, but think how much better it sounded!" Julia said, with twinkling eyes.
Mr. Ponsonby did not see the twinkle; he read Julia a lecture on selfishness and ended up by
     saying, "You are utterly selfish and ingrain lazy, that's what you are; you don't want to do a
     stroke of honest work for any one."
"Dishonest work is where I shine," Julia told him. "Oh, not scoundrelly dishonesty, company
     promoting, and so on," (Mr. Ponsonby was on several boards of directors, but he was not a
     company promoter, still he snorted a little) "I mean real dishonest work; with a little
     practice I would make such a thief as you do not meet every day in the week."
"I can quite believe it," her uncle retorted grimly; "lazy people generally do take to lying
     and stealing and, as I say, lazy is what you are. Sooner than work for your living, you go and
     pig in a cottage, because you think that way you can do nothing all day; lead an idle
     life."
"Yes," Julia agreed sweetly; "I think that must be my reason—a nice comfortable idle life
     with the pigs and poultry, and garden, and cooking, and scrubbing, and two incompetent old men.
     I really think you must be right."
Here it must be recorded, Mr. Ponsonby very nearly lost his temper, and not without
     justification. Was he not giving time and consideration and (probably) money to help this
     hopeless family on to its legs again? And was it not more than mortal middle-aged man could
     bear, not only to be opposed by the only member with any means, but also to be made sly fun of
     by her? He gave Julia his opinion very sharply, and no doubt she deserved it. But the worst of
     it was that did not prevent her from exercising the right of the person who is not a beggar to
     choose.
The Polkington family, who were soon afterwards
      called in to assist at the discussion, sided with Mr. Ponsonby. Violet and Mrs.
     Polkington with great decision, the Captain more weakly. Eventually he was won over to Julia
     because her scheme seemed to hold a place for him where he could flatter himself he was wanted.
     The argument went on and angrily, on the part of some present; Julia was most amiable; but, as
     the Van Heigens had found, she was an extremely awkward antagonist, the more amiable, the more
     awkward, even in a weak position, as with them, and in a strong one, as now, she was a great
     deal worse. Mr. Ponsonby lost the train he meant to catch back to London; he did not do it only
     for the benefit of his sister, but also because Julia had given battle and he was not going to
     retire from the field. Violet and Mr. Frazer deliberately postponed the hour of their
     departure; Violet was determined not to leave things in this condition; Julia's plan, she
     considered a disgrace to the whole family. Mr. Frazer was asked not to come to the family
     council; Violet explained to him that they were having trouble with Julia; she would tell him
     all about it afterwards, but it distressed her mother so much that it would perhaps be kinder
     if he was not there at the time. Mr. Frazer quite agreed; he shared some of his wife's
     sentiments about appearances; also he had no wish to be distressed either in mind or
     tastes.
Violet did tell him about it afterwards; a curtailed and selected version, but one eminently
     suitable to the purpose. On hearing it he was justly angry with Julia's heartless selfishness
     in keeping her legacy to herself. He was also shocked at her determination to go and live a
     farm labourer's life in a farm labourer's cottage. He was truly sorry for Mrs. Polkington,
     between whom and himself there existed a mutual affection and admiration. He said it was
     bitterly hard that her one remaining daughter should
      treat her thus; that it was barbarous, impossible, that a woman of her age,
     tastes, refinement and gifts should be compelled to lead such a life as was proposed. In fact
     he could not and would not permit it; he hoped that she would make her home at his rectory;
     nay, he insisted upon it; both Violet and himself would not take a refusal; she must and should
     come to them.

Julia smiled her approval; when things were worked up to this end; she would have liked to
     clap her applause, it was so well done. Mrs. Polkington and Violet were so admirable, they were
     already almost convinced of all they said; in two days they would believe it quite as much as
     Mr. Ponsonby did now. She did not in the least mind having to appear as the ungrateful
     daughter; it fitted in so beautifully with Violet's arrangement. And really the arrangement was
     very good; the utilitarian feelings of the family did not suffer at wrenches and splits as did
     more tender ones; no one would object much to an advantageous division. And most advantageous
     it certainly was; the cottage household would go better without Mrs. Polkington and she would
     be far happier at the rectory. She would not make any trouble there; rather, she would give her
     son-in-law cause to be glad of her coming; there would be scope for her there, and she would
     possibly develop better than she had ever had a chance of doing before.
So everything was decided. The house in East Street was to be given up, and most of its
     contents sold; as Julia's cottage was furnished already with Aunt Jane's things, she need only
     take a few extras from the home. The debts were to be paid as far as possible now, and the
     small income was to be divided; part was to go as pin money to Mrs. Polkington, the main part
     of the re
     mainder to go to the debts, and a very small modicum to come with the Captain to
     the cottage.
Julia was quite satisfied, and let it be apparent. This, with her obvious cheerfulness,
     rather incensed Violet, who regarded the sale of their effects as rather a disgrace, and
     Julia's plans for the future, as a great one.
"You ought to be ashamed of yourself," she told her younger sister, just before she left
     Marbridge. "I am positively ashamed to think you belong to us. It will be nice to meet Norfolk
     people at the Palace or somewhere, who have seen you tending your pigs and doing your washing.
     It is such an unusual name; I can quite fancy some one being introduced to mother and thinking
     it odd that her name should be the same as some dirty cottage people."
"Well," Julia suggested, "why not change it? Such a trifle as a name surely need not stand in
     our way; we have got over worse things than that. Mother can be something else, or I can;
     mother had better do it; father will forget who he is if I make a change."
"Don't be absurd," Violet said; "I only wish you could change it though; I never want to
     write to you as Julia Polkington in case some servant were to notice the address; one never
     knows how these things come out."
"Don't write as that," her sister told her; "address me as 'Julia Snooks' or anything else
     you like; I am not particular."
Violet did not take this as a serious suggestion; nevertheless, Julia told Mr. Frazer on the
     platform at Marbridge that she and Violet had been having a christening, and that she was now
     Julia Snooks. Mr. Ponsonby said it was ridiculous, to which Julia replied—
"That is what I am myself."
Mrs. Polkington said it was foolish too, but she did not
      say so vehemently; she felt that in the Frazer circle, especially at the Palace
     where she would meet people from everywhere, she might possibly come across some one who had
     heard of Julia. It was unlikely; still it is a small world, and Polkington an uncommon name.
     "Why not choose something simple, like 'Gray'?" she suggested.
"Because," Julia answered, "that is what I am not."
But fate had one exceedingly bitter pill for Mrs. Polkington. On the day after Chèrie and her
     husband sailed for South Africa, it was known in Marbridge that the news of Mr. Harding's
     engagement was false. The girl gossip had coupled with him was engaged, it is true, and to a
     Mr. Harding, but to another and entirely different bearer of the name. The real, eligible Mr.
     Harding called at East Street to explain to Mrs. Polkington how the mistake had arisen, to tell
     her that he himself had been away in the north for some weeks and so had heard nothing of it.
     Also to hear—and he had heard nothing of that either—that Chèrie was married and gone.
The news of Mr. Harding's freedom and his call, and what she fancied it might have implied,
     did not reach Chèrie till after her arrival in Africa. It did not tend to soothe the first
     weeks of married life, nor to make easier the rigorous, but no doubt wholesome, breaking-in
     process to which her husband wisely subjected her.


