

CHAPTER II
A WEEK had gone by, and day by day Eurydice and I had sat side by side on the deck
     talking; in the morning with the sun beating fiercely on the awning, in the afternoon with its
     rich, yellow glare thrown back from the water, in the evening with the cool, faint moonlight
     falling on us, and at night when the moon had disappeared, under the steady glow of the
     stars.
Two philosophers in ancient Athens could hardly have discoursed more indefatigably in one of
     their covered walks than she and I upon that covered deck.
The great charm of these conversations was their pure impersonality. We discussed anything
     and everything except ourselves, our lives, or our experiences; and this fact set our
      conversation on a different level from any I had held
     before.
We were nothing while we talked, our opinions, theories, arguments, were everything. We were
     like parents losing themselves in the identity of their children. And this sort of talk, this
     mental contact with a mind like Eurydice's, was a novel and delightful experience for me.
She was clever, with a tremendous power for thought in her brain and a peculiar gift for its
     expression on her lips, and her influence on my own intellect was very great.
She roused it from the apathy into which it had sunk during six years of the empty, frivolous
     life of an army man in India. When with her, those six years seemed taken off my life.
She seemed to reinfuse through my brain the vigour it had had at six-and-twenty. And her
     influence on my moral being was as great.

In every word, in every sentence she uttered, in the whole length of those dispassionate
     conversations we had, there was gradually unfolded before me the beauty of an elevated, and yet
     extremely sympathetic character, and all the better part of my own was drawn irresistibly
     towards it.
Going back to my cabin from where we had been sitting forward, on this seventh night of our
     acquaintance, I knew that I loved her, and loved her with the best and noblest love one human
     being can feel for another, the love that has its roots in reverence and its fruits in
     devotion,—the love that thinks only of the object, and will deny its own to gain its idol's
     pleasure. To her I would dedicate my life, if she would accept the dedication, and I thought of
     it with the passionate enthusiasm of youth, with the ardour of self-devotion and worship that
     is an innate though hidden trait of human nature.

Hidden, little seen perhaps, because so rarely is the worthy object for worship found.
Seven days! Not long a time in which to know and judge another, but I was satisfied. Every
     instinct, every voice within me, told me this was a woman not merely that I could love but one
     that I could worship. And I believed that she would accept both love and worship from me. I
     believed she was drawn to me as I to her with a strong inclination that I would set myself to
     turn into love.
I was over thirty, but I felt less than twenty that night as I walked back to my cabin
     thinking of her with the first fresh light of Love breaking into my life.
The following evening after dinner, I went to find her as usual, but, for the first time,
     with an uncertain tremor of feeling, because for the first time a personal prayer was on my
     lips.
I went slowly along the deck. The boards
      were steady and level as the boards of a ballroom. The night
     was dark but breathless; the sea gleamed, smooth and almost motionless, on either side, just
     faintly rising and swelling like the bosom of a woman asleep.
Ahead of me, rose the masts with their intricate masses of rigging spun like a gigantic web
     across the star-spangled sky, and halfway up the mast swung an electric light, pouring a shower
     of tremulous transverse rays through the cordage.
Beneath it, in the full flood of light, that seemed to descend upon her like a mantle of
     silver, she was sitting idly.
There were a good many other passengers on the deck, the majority strolling up and down in
     twos and twos, some sitting at small deck tables playing cards or chess.
A group of well-dressed girls, surrounded with a semicircle of young men on chairs,
      were sitting smoking and drinking at the far end in the
     shadow, their thin laughter diffused with their cigarette smoke in the warm, languid air.
She, the handsomest woman on board, sat idle, silent, and alone. Instinctively my feet
     quickened.
She looked up as I approached with a slow soft smile that struck me vaguely as the most sad
     that I had seen yet upon her face.
My own heart beat as I met it, for a second my voice died, dried, suffocated in my
     throat.
‘How long you have been!’ she murmured with the smile still on her mouth, and the low tone
     seemed like a sigh on the night air.
Fire, not blood, seemed rushing through my veins.
I looked round, guided by some serviceable mechanical instinct, and drew a chair close beside
     and parallel to hers, and threw myself into it. Thus we were screened from view by
      the mast and some vacant chairs that had been piled against
     it.
I looked at her, looked at the leant-back head with its weight of brilliant hair, turned just
     so much towards me as to suggest a faint longing to rest near mine, at the line of the nostril,
     slightly dilated, at the trembling lashes, and the pallor of the delicious throat with the
     uncertain light playing over it.
No word was said, but on the bare arm that lay along the chair-rest by mine, I laid my
     hand.
‘Have you been waiting for me?’ I said.
‘Yes,’ came back as a breath, from her lips that hardly parted to say it.
That one moment when this soft, weak word came to my ears was perhaps the supremest of
     unmixed joy in my life. For that single instant the promise of pleasure shone out clear and
     distinct, denuded of its inexorable pains and penalties and fetters.

The future and the past were obliterated, mere blots, that single point of time enclosed
     nothing but the spontaneous irresponsible delight of nature.
Swayed and dominated by it, and passionately conscious of her presence, her proximity, her
     vitality, her personality, and oblivious of all else, I leant my elbow on her chair.
‘And now dearest, I am here.’
I felt her arm glow and quiver suddenly under my fingers.
A sudden relaxation, like the loosening of a musical string, passed through her form, almost
     a collapse, and the lovely head turned from me.
‘Pray don't,’ she murmured, and the voice seemed suffocated with suppressed tears.
Blinded and confused with my own feelings, and lost in my own sense of triumphant
     satisfaction, I hardly was conscious of surprise or wonder, and I answered half jestingly:
      ‘Why do you turn away? Love always pursues a fugitive.’
That word seemed to break some bond that had been holding her. She started and sat upright,
     throwing my hand from her arm, and turned her face to me.
It was deathlike, and in the steel-coloured, wavering light, her eyes blazed upon me through
     the crowding tears.
‘How can you say that word to me?’
I was dismayed and startled. I looked back at her, not knowing what her meaning was.
Then as a half-drunken man, when called to account, confusedly recalls his words, not because
     he sees their folly, but because he dimly knows his power of judgment is gone, I suddenly
     mistrusted what I had said, what I had intimated, what my glance had been in that first great
     impulse of passion.
Intoxicated still, and not thinking clearly, I felt she thought in some way her dignity
      offended, and I said hurriedly: ‘Why, when we were saying
     yesterday there was nothing so divine as married love?’
‘But,’ and her voice was breathless, the one sentence seemed to break from her beating breast
     painfully as if she had been stabbed there. ‘You must know ... I am married.’
There was silence. An unbreakable silence in which we sat motionless, almost breathless,
     facing each other, staring at each other,—our gaze locked in each other's.
In me the power to move or speak was killed. The very life seemed suspended in me.
Married! That strained whisper had reached my brain and paralysed it.
The word struck in on the eager joy, the confident elation, on all the delightful confusion
     of feeling within me and instantaneously destroyed it.
And in the sudden void there were left two
      struggling emotions, one the sense of mad incredulity, the
     other the conviction that it was true.
I knew in those terrible moments clearly that it was so somehow in some incomprehensible
     way.
There had been some error somewhere. It would be explained to me later: what did it matter? I
     glanced at her ringless hands indifferently. I had no power to feel anger.
All emotion was lost, all feelings made level in one sickening blank.
At last the sense of mere physical life and power came back to me. My brain was stunned and
     deadened still, but mechanical actions became possible.
‘No, I swear I did not know it,’ I said quietly, and I got up and left her.
I walked down the same side of the steamer I had passed up a few moments back, the same sound
     of laughter from the far end
      reaching me, the same light circles of smoke drifting down
     beside me, the same calm night upon the water round, only now there was a hell within me.
As I walked on, I met Dickinson by the saloon door.
‘Coming to the smoking-room?’ he said.
‘No. I've rather a bad head. I'm going down,’ I answered.
Dickinson looked at me.
‘Sorry. You look seedy. What's she been doing to you?’ he added mockingly.
I shrugged my shoulders and passed him in silence.
Then I glanced back over my shoulder and saw him walking decisively in her direction. I went
     on downstairs with a smile.
I entered my own cabin and crossed to the window, folded my arms there and leant with my head
     upon them, letting the revolt of feeling have its way.

Married! this woman.
The word stirred a mad unreasoning rebellion within me. A rebellion of all those finer,
     purer, more tender instincts that had sprung up round the main passionate impulse of love for
     her—this girl as I had thought her.
The gentleness, the reverence, the consideration that ran through all my thoughts regarding
     her, and that I had sedulously encouraged and cultivated for her sake, had been like delicate
     flowers growing on the sides of a volcano and co-existent with the subterranean flames.
And as in an eruption of the volcano the flowers perish, are annihilated and obliterated in
     the flow of boiling lava, so now all those holier, more tender impulses, sank submerged under
     the liberated tide of the underlying passion.
It was not, as I recognised in an agony of self-abasement, that my love for her was dying, it
     was changing.

Her words could not kill it, but they would transform it.
Its extinction I would have welcomed, its metamorphosis I knew and dreaded.
It must have been a long time that I stood there, but of how long I was unconscious, and at
     last, breaking the silence, and startlingly distinct in it came a hesitating tap at the
     door.
It was a gentle knock, but the sound went through the cabin and sent the blood across my
     face. I turned and paused irresolute. Should I open the door or not? I felt a distinct distaste
     to see this woman then.
I waited, and half unconsciously I expected the knock to be repeated.
It was not, however, and, stimulated by the thought that she had gone, I walked to the door
     and threw it open.
She had not gone. She was standing there, and the light from the electric burner fell
      sharply on her. The passage and all beyond her was in
     darkness.
We both stood for a second in silence, and I noted her face stone-white except for the
     scarlet line of the lips.
I felt I could have struck her as she stood there.
‘May I speak to you ... explain ...’ she faltered.
‘I don't think there's much use in talk,’ I said shortly.
‘Perhaps not,’ she answered, with a touch of the familiar satire. ‘Come and talk all the
     same!’
I stood irresolute, unwilling to go, but she was the woman I loved, and she said come, and I
     went.
We passed through the passage together and found our way to the companion-stair.
She stumbled twice beside me in the darkness, and twice I caught her arm to steady her.

When we reached the deck she crossed to the side and leant against the rail, holding to it as
     if for support. I folded my arms on the iron bar and looked away from her, down on the black
     dividing water beneath us where the phosphorus rose, gleamed, scintillated, and passed as the
     ship flew forward.
A warm breath seemed to come against our faces from the heaving, ever-varying smooth salt
     surface. I would not look at her, but the keen, sensitive side-vision of the eye gave me her
     image as she stood beside me, and that was all I saw.
‘So you didn't know I was married?’ she said at last in a weak, hurried tone.
‘Of course I did not! married women usually wear their wedding-ring!’
‘I lost it the second day I came on board,’ she answered; ‘in the bathroom, I
     was using cold water, and my hands were very cold. I suppose it slipped off then. At least I
     could not find it afterwards, and I could not replace
      it on board ship, but my name was down on the list of
     passengers as Mrs. Williamson, and so of course I ... I thought...’
‘I don't study the list of passengers,’ I said coldly.
There was silence for a long time, and then she said timidly:
‘I think you're angry with me.’
‘I suppose I have no right to be angry,’ I returned bitterly; ‘but it seems odd after all our
     conversation together that the subject should never have come up.’
‘My marriage is not such a pleasant thing that I am always thinking and talking of it,’ she
     said, with a short laugh.
‘Don't you care for the man?’ I said after a minute, and the surge of struggling emotions
     within me and the restraint upon them all made my voice sound hard and cold.
‘Care for him!’ and the contemptuous laugh said the rest.

‘Why did you marry him, then?’ I said dully. ‘A woman like you could have had anybody.’
‘No; that's just where you make the mistake!’ she said vehemently. ‘That is what a man always
     says to a woman who is decent looking and young; but those things do not last, and a girl's
     time is not long enough for her to make her choice in. Hardly a girl in a thousand marries the
     man she would choose. I did not. From fifteen upwards I have had offers from men I did not care
     for, nor want, and at twenty-three I accepted one of them from the man who pleased me most. I
     thought it did not matter. I had ceased to expect to meet a man I really loved—I had seen so
     many in those eight years, I was getting to think I expected too much from life, that love, as
     I imagined it, did not perhaps exist at all, that, in waiting for something imaginary, I should
     let the reality pass by me. Don't you see,’ she said impatiently
      patiently, ‘what a woman's position is? You men only care for
     youth and beauty! Nothing else weighs a straw with you! Character, intellect, virtue, they are
     practically as nothing to you. You teach a woman that, so she knows she must either marry in
     her twenties or face all the rest of her life alone. I waited eight years—then I married
     without love, and now, one year after ... we have met.
‘Is it not the ordinary rule of life, just the ordinary mockery of fate, everything comes
     just a little, and only a little, too late?
‘He does not care for me,’ she continued bitterly. ‘I am nothing to him now, in fact I have
     not been since ... since ... oh, well, I don't know when his fancy for me died; at the end of
     the first month of our married life, I think, and when I realised it ... the fearful blank that
     overspread everything—I seemed to see the future like a huge trackless desert before me
     stretching up even to the edge of
      my grave, and he, he shares his life with other women!’
‘Then why do you not get a divorce?’ I asked, a sudden ray of hope breaking upon me at her
     words. ‘Surely your self-respect, the self-respect of any woman, should urge that!’
‘How can I?’ she said simply. ‘He is not cruel.’
She looked at me as she spoke, and in those few words I read the whole tragedy of this
     woman's life. I understood, and I said nothing. What can one say against these laws of
     life?
‘He has never sworn in my presence and never struck me,’ she continued quietly, as if
     pursuing her own thoughts, and then, as an exclamation of anger escaped me, she looked up
     quickly and said: ‘Why? It would be the kindest thing he could do. I have often looked at him
     and longed for a blow, though even then I am not sure I would get a divorce if I could.’

‘Why not?’ I asked, with another question burning on my lips that they refused to frame.
‘Because,’ she said in a low voice, ‘to me marriage is the holiest of all sacraments and
     divorce is a sacrilege.’
I was surprised, and I looked at her in wonder.
Unmoved and seemingly unconscious of my gaze she stood, a slight white figure leaning against
     the rail, with the measureless, abysmal blackness of the sea beneath and before her, and the
     fathomless gloom of the night above and around her. Her arms were folded motionless upon the
     bar; her eyes, turned away from me, looked out into the darkness.
Had the words come from a woman happy in her life, happy in her love, they would hardly have
     struck me, but from her lips, the lips of a woman who had suffered, was at this moment
     suffering acutely through this very marriage she termed the holiest of all sacraments
      ments, those words had tremendous weight, and revealed still
     further to me the great impersonality of this mind I loved.
‘But surely,’ I urged, ‘when he has so far broken the ties, then you also are free.’
‘Hardly, I think,’ she said in the level voice of one who has passed through and left behind
     doubt and question, whose decisions are immutably formed, and whose acting on them has become
     almost mechanical. ‘He has broken them in secret, but divorce breaks them in public. You see,’
     she added, and her voice became intensely grave, ‘suppose I take the communion with another,
     and I see that he spills the wine, I would not overturn the table for that reason.’
I was silent. The solemnity of her manner half awed me, and checked all personal and selfish
     arguments. When I spoke, it was with a weak evasiveness.
‘If you left him surely the world even would
      not condemn you. At least you would have the sympathy of all
     those whose sympathy is worth having.’
‘And what then?’ she said with an accent of surprise. ‘I don't live for the world's sympathy,
     I live for my own duty. To be true to myself is my principle, and the only guide I have,’ she
     added, turning fully to me, and the tremendous force and power that looked out from the light
     brilliant eyes seemed to beat down personal thought in my brain and hold me, merely listening.
     ‘Always to do that which I consider right and honourable, independent of loss or gain, or
     praise or condemnation. Others may say what they please, for their opinion I care not at all,
     but my own good opinion I must have. I could not live without it. I must feel always that I
     have nothing to reproach myself with; and if I left him I should reproach myself. The fact that
     he has sinned does not give me a licence to sin also.
      Besides, even supposing for one instant that I felt myself
     justified in leaving him, I would not; for, if I did, my example might make the way easier for
     another woman less justified, or even not justified at all, to desecrate her word. I have given
     mine once, and now I am bound by it until Death releases me.’
‘And yet you can praise Marriage as a glorious institution.’ The words were stung out of me
     by the pressure of my own feelings, said in spite of my self-control, and brought regret the
     moment after.
Her white face became even whiter, and I saw her tremble visibly with nervous excitement as
     she hesitated for a moment, seeking words to defend that which she considered holy against my
     sneer.
‘Yes,’ she answered passionately, ‘It is: I have always thought so, and think so still. The
     fact that I have through folly or misfortune rendered myself unhappy by its means
      does not blind me to its value. Because the gift of gold is
     sometimes ruin to a man, would you deny that gold is gold? As a sacrament married life is holy;
     as a theory it is perfect. In practice, perhaps, it is not always either, for humanity is
     neither holy nor perfect, but blame Humanity for that, not Marriage. Love, absolute love, is so
     difficult to find, only to be obtained by the fortunate, to be envied by the unfortunate, but
     if you have found it, then surely this marriage that it's the fashion to laugh at, this
     knitting together for ever of the two half lives, this absolute dedication each to the other,
     this open unashamed union, blessed and ratified in the sight of all men, this undenied and
     eternal devotion and surrender of the two existences to each other, surely this is the most
     satisfying sphere in which two love-inspired minds can move. Think what it might have been,
     would have been, if we had entered it together!’

She was facing me now, and her form seemed suddenly taller, dilated with the strength of
     feeling moving her.
In the darkness that had grown and grown as we stood there, I could still see the pallid
     suffering face raised to mine.
Involuntarily I made a step towards her with outstretched arms; all the best part of human
     love, all in it that most nearly reflects the Divine, roused and stirred in me. I forgot my
     anger against her of an hour back.
Even myself and my own personal passion for her sank into momentary oblivion. For that
     instant I worshipped rather than loved her.
She stepped back from me farther into the gloom of the body of the ship, and farther away
     from the slight reflected light that came from the water.
‘No, don't follow me,’ she said in a suffocated voice. ‘There is nothing, nothing now for us,
     but separation.’

With the last word she vanished; the black background seemed to divide for a moment and then
     close again between me and her. When I went forward there was black space only and the hanging
     cords of the rigging.
The next days contained an indescribable, almost indefinable suffering for me, caged on board
     face to face with Eurydice, never separated by more than a few feet of space, seeing her with
     my physical eyes, hearing her voice, brushed by her dress, and yet conscious of that relentless
     wall between us, invisible, intangible, impalpable, and yet horribly real, as some overpowering
     presence in a nightmare.
There were five more days of the voyage before us, and on the first, as I came into the
     breakfast-room, pale and heavy-eyed, and took my place opposite her, as I sat through the
     déjeuner facing her across the narrow table on which our plates nearly touched, I slowly
     realised the rack to which I was bound.

‘Good God!’ was the first thought that went through me, as I felt an intolerable impulse rise
     in me to escape from her proximity. ‘Is it possible that another personality can have dominated
     me so far?’
Last night the way had seemed hard but clear. She was married. She was absolutely another's,
     and therefore of no use to me, and should have been, according to my reason, of no interest for
     me. This had seemed so clear to me last night. It was not so clear now. On the contrary, I felt
     that this woman who could never be anything, whom, now, I did not even wish to be anything to
     me, had yet an absorbing, overpowering interest for me. The thought of her filled my mind to
     running over, just as her presence, her image, seemed to weigh upon my physical senses. Before
     the breakfast was one-third over I pushed away my unfinished coffee and untouched plate and got
     up. I left the saloon and went on deck, to the extreme
      point forward and leant there. I was surprised, angered,
     annoyed, to feel that my whole mental being seemed overstraining and stronger than the control
     I put upon it.
Last night I had confessed to myself, I had told myself openly—the thing is at an end—all is
     over, and this woman has no further attraction for you. You are now face to face with a
     temptation which to yield to would blacken, in your own eyes, your conscience for ever. Trample
     on the idea now and stamp it out finally, and I had thought I could, in adherence to my
     principles. Most men have some principles, since principles are nothing more than obstinate
     prejudices against certain acts, and a high-principled man means nothing more than an
     individual whose prejudices are very obstinate, very numerous, and against those acts which the
     community he happens to be living in is also prejudiced against. And, like the rest, I had
     several prejudices, which I called
      my principles, and the chief amongst them perhaps was the one
     in question now.
To seduce another's wife was an idea that in itself revolted me; rather unreasonably, since
     the accomplishment was fashionable in the regiment and in the station I had come from; but, in
     spite of my training, it still seemed to me an act tinged with disgrace and dishonour, an act
     mean and as utterly impossible to myself as to steal a friend's money or to forge his name. And
     it seemed so to me still.
I felt an intense revolt from it in my whole nature that no temptation and no passion could
     overcome.
Impossible! yes, it was simply that and nothing less than that, and I knew it.
But why, then, this overwhelming domination of the mind by the thought of an impossibility? I
     leant hard on the rails and looked down into the fathomless depths of green water seething at
     the vessel's side—not more fathomless than
      the psychology of one poor feeble human being. It is not the
     function of the sane mind to dwell upon a desire which is absolutely beyond its attainment, and
     once convinced of the entire helplessness of a project it usually has no difficulty in losing
     its grasp upon it, yet here my mind seemed gripped as in a vice, paralysed by a desire that I
     knew was absolutely vain.
It was extraordinary, the indefinable, irresistible fascination that the thought of her, the
     image of her, possessed for me. I resented it, wrestled with it, struggled under it in vain,
     the mind was passing through an inexplicable phase, completely subjugated, unnerved and
     unstrung by the abstract contemplation of pleasure which it fully recognised, absolutely
     impossible of attainment.
The last day came. We were due at Marseilles at seven in the evening. We dined at six.
     Eurydice and I sat as usual opposite each other; and, do what I would, I could not keep
      my eyes from resting on her, an irresistible magnetism drew
     them back and back to her. She ate nothing. She accepted a few courses and sent them away
     untouched. She sat white, motionless, with almost all the beauty stamped out of her face,
     leaving a blank of pallor and suffering.
The punkah still swayed over our table, and it almost brushed our heads; each time it passed
     over hers it lifted the black, gilt-tinted curls from her forehead and then came back to
     me.
She never raised her eyes once to mine, nor spoke throughout the whole dinner, and then, when
     we all rose, I heard the woman next her say:
‘You look terribly ill, what is the matter, dear?’
Eurydice was just rising from her chair, her shoulder was slightly raised as she leant one
     arm on the chair-back, the other smooth,
      supple hand just touched the edge of the table. I watched
     her.
The heavy white lids lifted suddenly, and the brilliant eyes flashed over her friend's face,
     and the white lips curved in a satiric smile.
‘Sea-sick!’ she said with a mocking laugh, and got up and passed out of the saloon.
I had heard, and I walked over to the port-window, feeling a sudden violent revolt, a wild
     rebellion of Self against Self-made laws. That laugh of hers, full of bravely repressed and
     hidden pain, and ringing with mockery and cynical philosophy, stirred and roused my admiration.
     She was of the material of which martyrs are made. An untamable, unbreakable spirit, that
     laughed in the face of Fate and mocked at its own pain, fired the blood in those smooth
     veins.
I stood there for a time. Then I turned to seek her. See her I must, speak to her once more
     before we touched the land.

I threaded my way through the confusion, over and amongst the scattered luggage and round the
     groups of passengers, passed down the companion-stairs, found my way to her cabin door and
     knocked.
There was an assentive murmur from within, and I pushed the door open.
She was sitting on the floor in the centre of the cabin, before a half-packed portmanteau.
     Her face was blanched, and she looked ill and tired, as she glanced up when the door
     opened.
She did not move as her eyes fixed upon me.
I came in, shut the door and leant against it. Ceremony was laid aside, forgotten.
The cabin was in disorder, crowded with feminine attire and trifles of all sorts; over the
     berth by the window swung, still unpacked, her husband's portrait. The window stood open, and
     beyond gleamed the lights of the port.
‘I am leaving now,’ I said, and my voice
      sounded half-strangled to myself, ‘if you wish it; do
     you?’
Her lips quivered visibly. The pale face grew paler; then she turned her eyes from me and
     looked into the trunk.
‘Yes,’ she answered in a low voice; ‘go.’
‘And is this to be final? Do think again. Let me know where you are going, let me know where
     you will be. Let me have the hope of seeing you sometimes, Eurydice!’ I added desperately as
     she would not speak.
‘No; it is impossible,’ she said at last in a low tone. ‘I have quite decided. This is
     final.’
‘Shall I never see you again?’ I said dully, and my eyes seemed literally to drink in the
     vision of her and hold it.
‘Chance may throw us together again, but I hope not,’ she answered with an intense gravity.
     ‘This is our duty—to part now—and we know it. Let us do it.’

She turned her face to me. It was white and agonised.
Her lips trembled violently in soft human weakness, but the eyes were lit up with holy
     determination and resolve.
It appealed to me; for that moment I felt I would not break it if I could.
‘Good-bye, then.’
One step forward and I bent over her, lifted her, and strained her hard to my breast and
     kissed her.
It was the death of our love, and guiltless as a dying kiss.
The white throat swelled in a suffocated sob, the tremulous arms fluttered against my
     throat.
‘Good-bye, Evelyn.’
And I went out.
I walked along the crowded lower passage, blind and deaf to all round me, conscious only of
     what a curse at times this life can seem.

I found Dickinson waiting for me with our luggage just outside the smoking-room door.
‘Thought you were never coming,’ he exclaimed discontentedly as I came up.
Then he looked hard at me. ‘I say, old man, have a drink or, er—something, won't you?’ he
     added in a different sort of voice.
‘No, thanks,’ I said with a smile. ‘Come along, let's get off this as soon as we can.’
Dickinson did the best he could do under the circumstances—he let me alone—and arranged
     himself for the luggage and the other formalities, and within ten minutes we were walking down
     the quay away from the ship. I glanced back at it once before passing the customs barrier. Its
     masts and rigging stood out clear against the white light of the town, but all I saw was the
     inside of her cabin.
Dickinson passed our baggage through the customs and then we rattled in the lumbering cab
     through the stony streets of Marseilles.

‘How soon can we get on to London?’ I asked.
‘Oh, I say, old fellow, can't you stop the night here. I'm beastly tired and sea-sick,’ said
     Dickinson remonstratingly.
I put my hand on his arm. ‘I know you are, but hold on another few hours.’
‘Few hours!’ groaned Dickinson from the back of the cab. ‘It's thirty at the least. I hope
     you know that.’
‘Yes ... well, Paris, then ... for God's sake let's get away from here!’
‘Very good,’ said Dickinson resignedly; ‘let it be Paris, then, and we'll go on by the one
     A.M. train. There I shall drop like a ton of bricks. Sleep for a week, I think.’
