
CHAPTER I
‘BUT why not pay them? We may just as well now as when we reach the ship.’
The words came in a clear, cultivated woman's voice through the foggy duskiness of an
     Egyptian night, from the farther end of the boat, which swayed slightly from side to side on
     the smoothly heaving water.
It was an Aden boat loaded with passengers impatient to return to their ship. At least
     presumably they were impatient, but it was simply their refusal to pay the clamouring African
     boatmen their legitimate fee that kept us all waiting there, rocking in the unsteady wooden
     shell, with the semicircle of lights on
      the shore rising and falling before us through the hot
     sulphurous mist. The boatmen deferentially but firmly refused to loose the boat from the stage
     till each passenger had paid the due eightpence for his fare. The passengers clamoured and
     yelled, and swore that damned swine as they were, they should be paid when they reached the
     ship, and not before.
This sort of thing had been going on for half an hour while I sat smoking in the stern,
     watching the Scorpion in the jewelled sky above sinking slowly to the pointed rocks, and
     listening idly to the storm of oaths that was showered on the impassive blacks for daring to
     ask for their pay. I had already given my fare when I first stepped into the boat, so that the
     controversy did not concern me beyond my feeling bound to interfere when the man sitting next
     me, the British missionary, sprang to his feet with an oath that cannot be written, and raised
     his walking-stick to strike one of
      the boatmen in the face. I had just caught the heavy stick and
     forced him down again on to our cross bench when those clear tones came down to me.
They produced a distinct sensation of pleasure, and I threw a keen, scrutinising glance up
     the boat. In the thick yellow air, rendered all the more dazzling to the eyes by the broken,
     flaring light of the boatmen's torches, I saw sitting erect in the bows a long figure and the
     pale outlines of a face. The form was muffled in a dark voluminous cloak, and a hood was drawn
     over the head.
‘I should pay now; if you mean to at all.’
The voice was certainly a fascinating one, and the last phrase had a supercilious scepticism
     in it that amused me.
I knew, as well as the boatmen did, the British passengers' honourable fashion of getting
     conveyed to their ship under promise to pay, and then huddling away upon it, leaving
      the boatmen to demand their money of the empty air, and
     evidently the possessor of the voice was familiar with that fashion too.
A burst of resentful ejaculation followed the suggestion.
‘What! pay them?’
‘And now, after their insolence?’
‘Give in to these damned scoundrels!’
‘Well,’ the cold voice broke in again, ‘I am going to pay mine, and I strongly advise you to,
     or we may lose our ship. What can it matter to you whether you pay now or afterwards?’
Again that delightful satire in the cutting tone.
There was a general murmur and muttering amongst the passengers, but the truth of the remark
     on losing the ship went home, and the murmur was followed by a simultaneous getting up of
     several forms, as everybody began fumbling sulkily for the necessary pence, grumbling and
     swearing as they did so.

‘Have you any change?’—‘Oh, thanks,’—‘Pay you on board,’—‘Filthy pigs,’—and other broken
     remarks—were exchanged during another ten minutes, until finally the money was collected and
     each passenger had put his fare into the black extended hand above us.
‘Now, have you all the fares?’ asked the voice gently.
‘Yes, madam; thanks to you, madam; thank you, madam,’ answered the glib tones of the
     native.
‘Then push off.’
The master-boatman gave the command and the natives on the stage pushed with a will. Our boat
     shot out rocking on the smooth bay.
‘Good-night, madam,’ called the boatman respectfully to the figure in the bows.
‘Good-night,’ it answered, and I was struck now by the note of sweetness in the voice.
Chorus of passengers:—

‘How could you answer those insolent rascals?’
‘They were not the least insolent, and they were perfectly justified in demanding their
     money.’
The voice said no more, and the figure relapsed into the shadows at the end of the boat. I
     could see nothing more of it. All the other passengers were engaged in commiserating themselves
     and each other for having been obliged to pay their fare. I sat back and smoked in silence,
     watching the lights and great outline of our ship grow larger as we slid over the water towards
     it. When the boat ground against the lowest step of the ladder I kept my seat and let the other
     passengers scramble past me. Twice I was respectfully requested to disembark by the boatmen, as
     my seat was nearest of all to the ladder, and twice I politely declined, and sat on
     waiting.
The boat completely emptied itself, and then
      at last the figure in the bows rose and came easily down the
     unsteady craft towards me. The long coat reached to the feet and fell in black rigid lines, but
     the form was a wonderfully symmetrical one, and I got up with alacrity and looked eagerly round
     the hood into the face as the figure approached me.
‘Can I assist you?’ and I held out my hand.
The boat was jarring up and down against the ship's ladder uncertainly. A couple of Egyptians
     held it with their hands to the lowest rung waiting for us.
Two curiously light, brilliant eyes met mine from the pale smooth face enclosed by the
     hood.
‘Oh, thanks, very much,’ she said in a pleasant, half-derisive way, and a hand came on mine
     and held it firmly, and we both stepped from the rocking seat on to the steps. They were a
     broad flight, with a rope on either side,
      and I and my companion swung ourselves slowly up together.
My whole idea now was to say something which would elicit some information about her, but the
     tall form beside me in its impenetrable clothing seemed to exercise a confusing influence over
     me. My thoughts mixed themselves inextricably, and at last, when we were near the top of the
     ladder, I remarked simply:
‘I don't think I've seen you before?’
‘No, I have been ill with fever since we started. I have not emerged from my cabin.’
‘Are you near the centre of the ship?’
‘Yes, close to the centre on the left side.’
‘Left side? That's the men's side,’ I remarked carelessly.
‘Oh, they don't divide us very distinctly in these French boats!’
Confound it! Here we were at the head of the ladder.

‘Shall we stroll round the deck?’ I said. ‘It's really a lovely night. That fog is only just
     on the surface of the water.’
She turned to me with a gleaming smile; the light from the deck saloon windows fell full on
     the face, across the scintillating eyes and brilliant well-turned mouth.
‘Yes, I've no objection,’ came the careless answer, and we stepped over the loose coils of
     rope, passed through the opening in the chain, and stood side by side on the deck. I noticed my
     companion's shoulder was somewhat beneath my own.
I wished it had been rough weather, or our ship out of gear and rolling, but we were lying
     motionless in the bay, and there was no possible excuse for offering one's arm.
‘Would you object to my smoking?’ I said, as we turned towards the first-class passengers'
     end, where, under the stretched awning, in shadowy obscurity, stood deck-chairs of
      all descriptions, some vacant and some occupied.
My companion laughed. It was rather an affected, effeminate sort of laugh, and it irritated
     me. Perhaps it meant she smoked herself.
I got out my cigar-case and handed it first towards her.
‘Thanks, but I don't smoke.’
That was more encouraging. I lighted up, and we strolled on, my eyes keenly observant of her
     under dropped lids.
A wonderful carriage and walk, easy and self-reliant almost, but not quite to the point of
     arrogance, and, I felt sure, a lovely and seductive form under that hideous shapeless
     garment.
‘When do we leave to-night, do you know?’ she asked after a few minutes.
‘Midnight, I fancy,’ I answered.
‘Well, it 's close to that now, I should think.
      I am going down, so that I can have a chance of settling to
     sleep before we start.’
‘Oh, don't go down this minute,’ I urged. ‘I don't suppose we shall really set off much
     before morning.’
‘Why did you just tell me midnight then?’ she said amusedly, and then added: ‘I believe
     you've had too many pegs!’
I laughed. All the time we had been walking towards the companion-stair, and I did not want
     to see her disappear down it.
‘Look at the beauty of the night!’ I persisted. ‘Surely it's a pity to waste it by going
     below decks!’
‘Yes, it is beautiful,’ she said, stopping with her hand on the stair-rail and casting a long
     glance round the encircling purples of sky and sea; ‘so beautiful that you should contemplate
     it in silence and alone.—Good-night.’
‘Oh, let me see you to your cabin,’ I said hastily.

‘And what about the beauty of the night? Surely it's a pity to waste it by coming below
     decks!’
‘Orpheus descended even into Hades on a memorable occasion,’ I returned. She was already
     half-way down the stairs, and I followed her to the lower passage.
At the foot of the steps she stopped and turned.
‘Do you know my name?’ she asked, with a faint intonation of surprise.
‘No,’ I said promptly; ‘I wish I did!’
‘Well, but what made you say that then?’
‘Say what?’ I asked.
‘Why, about Orpheus!’
‘I don't know what you mean,’ I said in astonishment. ‘You're not called Orpheus surely!’ and
     we both laughed.
‘No, but ... Eurydice ... I thought perhaps you knew and ...’
‘Oh no,’ I said hastily; ‘I had no idea!
      What a curious coincidence! Is it really Eurydice? It's an
     awfully pretty name!’
‘Not with the surname,’ she answered, laughing. ‘Eurydice Williamson! Isn't it a frightful
     combination!’
‘I don't think so,’ I maintained unblushingly, though the seven syllables in conjunction
     positively set my teeth on edge.
Down here there was a good deal of confusion, and evident signs of approaching departure;
     luggage that had not yet been transferred to its owner's cabin or the hold stood blocking up
     the fairly broad space between the lines of cabins on either side of the vessel; the rafters
     were close over our heads; behind us thudded the engine, sending down streams of oil-scent and
     hot air through the thick atmosphere.
There was no light but that which fell through the dim, smoke-stained glass of a lamp swung
     to a cross-beam over our head. It enabled us
      just to see where to put our feet and avoid the piles of
     luggage, odd oil-cans, and loose coils of rope lying in all directions.
No one seemed down here. The passengers had for the most part disappeared into their cabins.
     The crew seemed wholly occupied on deck. Over our heads tramped perpetual hurried footsteps,
     chains were dragged, orders shouted, and goods pushed along the boards; but down here all was
     an obscure, heated, smoke-filled dusk.
‘That is my cabin, I think,’ my companion said, and I saw a white painted door a little ahead
     of us with No. 36 printed on it.
Another minute and she would have passed through it, not to reappear for another twelve
     hours. I felt quite annoyed at the thought.
I glanced at the covered head and neck and shoulders beside me in a succession of rapid
     nervous glances, and each time rejected an importunate idea that kept suggesting itself
      again and again with maddening persistency.
Then we were standing at the white-painted door, and she stretched her hand to the
     handle.
‘Good-night,’ she said, and she turned the pale contour of her face and its shining eyes upon
     me.
I felt dizzy with sudden excitement; the face whirled before my eyes in the dingy air.
I bent over her on a mischievous, jesting impulse, pinned one shoulder against the cabin
     door, and leant my lips down to hers. She drew her head back violently to avoid them, and I
     heard the sharp blow of the skull on the woodwork.
The next second both her hands struck my chest, and pushed me backwards with desperate
     force.
She opened the door behind her, and the next instant its white boards were between us.

I looked at them savagely for a second, then I collected myself and turned with a laugh to
     find my way out of this stifling, murky, circumscribed space.
I hurried up the companion-stair and turned on to the deck into the still, hot night.
Just as I did so the figure of my travelling companion came down towards me.
‘I say! Dickinson!’
‘Hullo!’
‘Do you know who that person is, Williamson the name is, in No. 36 cabin?’
Dickinson stopped and stared at me.
‘What have you been up to?’ he said laconically after a minute's survey.
‘Why?’ I said evasively, feeling myself colour. ‘How do you mean?’
‘Well, you look rather excited. Come and have a drink.’
‘Yes, I think I will,’ I answered. ‘But really, have you seen this passenger Williamson?
      Upon my honour the dress was most extraordinary.’
‘What on earth are you talking about?’ Dickinson returned. ‘I don't know whom you mean. All
     the passengers I've seen are a most ordinary lot.’
I saw he knew nothing about it, and that I could not get any information from him, and it
     suddenly occurred to me it was unwise to interest him too much in the Unknown. Dickinson was a
     good-looking fellow, and piqued himself on his skill and experience with women.
When he returned to the charge a minute later, as I kept silence, with ‘Well, what's the
     joke? Come along, let's have it,’ I answered: ‘Oh, bother! I don't know. Let's get those drinks
     before the stewards go.’
Dickinson got the impression I was a little screwed, and I let him keep it. I took a couple
     of brandies and sodas with him in the saloon,
      talked a lot of nonsense to avoid rational conversation, and
     then got away to my own cabin, bolted the door, turned on the electric light, and flung myself
     on the couch under the window.
I made myself comfortable with a cushion under my head, and a first-rate Aden cigarette in my
     teeth, and stared up through the great square open port-window at the brilliant sky, which
     changed as the ship moved onward as a turning kaleidoscope.
I was thinking of the dead failure of that kiss, and I laughed outright as I recalled the
     sharp blow of the head on the woodwork.
‘Fearful crack it must have been!’ I thought. ‘I shall be in for some terrific apology
     to-morrow, I expect.’
Of course my conduct had been terribly flippant and my levity quite reprehensible, but then a
     hard-worked Indian officer, going home on his first leave, is apt to be afflicted with a
      buoyancy of spirits. It is not a malady that attacks us very
     frequently in this life, but I had it badly just then.
Six years of honest hard labour in the East lay behind me.
One year's idleness at home, gilded with a thundering good income just come into, lay before
     me. In these circumstances, who would not feel a certain irresponsible gaiety?
I lay back contentedly, with my thoughts wandering to England and all I would do there, and
     with a comfortable conviction I was the luckiest fellow going.
The next morning I was at the breakfast-table punctually at nine, and I scanned the line of
     faces on either side with eager eyes, but the one I sought was absent.
For the whole two hours during which breakfast was served to relays of passengers I sat
     waiting with exemplary patience; but she did not appear, and when the stewards came to
      remove the cloth I went up-stairs, feeling vexed and
     disappointed.
‘Ill again, I suppose,’ I thought, and began to walk slowly up the deck.
Then as I glanced along the polished boards, shining in the morning sunlight, suddenly I saw
     her. My heart beat suddenly.
I felt the blood come to my face, and I turned aside and leant over the rail, that I might
     see for a moment without being seen. Iron supports ran up from the side-railing to which the
     awning was attached, and beside one of these, round which a loose piece of canvas furled and
     unfurled in the salt breeze, I stood and looked along the deck.
She was sitting in a long chair reading. The fierce light beating through the yellow canvas
     fell warmly round her.
She was dressed in white serge, and the form I had divined last night I clearly and exactly
     realised with my vision now. Thin, as I had
      thought, but incomparably graceful, with a turn of the
     shoulder and a pose of the neck, that, as my eye caught it, seemed to arrest my very
     pulses.
She was wearing no hat, and the stray gleams of sunlight coming at intervals under the awning
     glittered on the dark hair, making it a confusion of gilt and ebony.
I paused a second or two to get rid of the look of triumphant pleasure I felt must be on my
     face, and then, summoning the most dejected expression I could, I walked hastily up towards her
     with a sort of contrite, desperately anxious air.
She continued to read till I was close beside her chair. I stopped and looked down upon her,
     and she glanced up at me.
Such a look came upon me from under the lids!
Sabres unsheathed, knives in the sunlight, and fires burnt blue, were none of them in it with
     that look, and as she transferred her eyes
      immediately to the book again, I almost expected to see the
     page shrivel under them. I felt rather shrivelled.
‘Will you ever forgive me for last night?’ I said in my gentlest tone. ‘I have no words to
     say how I regret it.’
There was no response. I waited, watching the delicate angry scarlet receding and returning,
     glowing and suffusing itself, under the pale skin. I felt keenly, as it were, extra conscious
     of everything,—of the heat smiting down on us through the canvas, of the glare from the
     shimmering sea, of the buoyant roll of the ship as it cut through the blue turbulent water.
‘What is there I can say or do? How can I earn your forgiveness?’
No answer.
The long figure and the satin head beneath me remained motionless.
‘To forgive,’ I murmured, ‘is the divinest prerogative of the human being.’

‘On the contrary,’ and the tone of the cold voice seemed literally to cut the sunny air, ‘to
     respect itself.’
‘One cannot respect oneself if one has no charity and no mercy,’ I returned.
A slight shrug of the shoulders was the only answer.
I stood wondering what argument would tell with her most; then, taking my cue from her last
     words, I said in a low voice:
‘At least there's one extenuation, not of my error perhaps, but of the injury to you: I did
     not succeed.’
The scarlet under her eyes deepened a little, and she answered curtly:
‘No. If you had, I never could have forgiven you.’
My heart beat.
‘But now you will?’ I said, bending a little lower and throwing the most reverential anxiety
     into my tone.

She was silent a few seconds, then she said decisively:
‘Yes. Let us say no more with reference to it. I wish to forget such a thing was even
     possible.’
I was rather surprised at her summary dismissal of the subject. It was more a masculine than
     a feminine way of treating it.
I expected her to forgive me, but I thought that, like most women, she would have pottered
     round the matter at least half an hour first.
However, the surprise was pleasant, and I felt on the whole admiration for the way she had
     treated me. She had forgiven me, but she had made me feel distinctly that pardon was no
     invitation to err again, and her brief disposal of the matter seemed to me more convincing of
     her real anger than if she had maintained a show of implacable resentment.
I stood looking down upon her in silence,
      noting the tranquil forehead with not a line to mar it, from
     the sweep of the long eyebrows to the black silk-like rings of the hair at the pale oval of the
     face, lighted by the fleeting scarlet tints in the cheeks and the curious lustre of the
     eyes.
I turned and drew an empty chair up beside hers at the side of the deck and threw myself into
     it.
There was silence between us, and I made no effort to break it.
For those moments I delivered myself over to that sense of keen simple pleasure in life that
     comes upon all created beings at times, even the most wretched, like an unexpected gust of
     wind. The realisation comes suddenly that they live, and Life itself, distinct from
     circumstance and environment, is pure rapture.
I leant back in the mellow light under the sun-smitten awning, the freshening breeze urging
      ing on the flying steamer, the blue undulating billows
     rolling and swelling exuberantly as they bore us on. I felt the keen salt wind, full of vital
     life-giving principle, blow against my face, and I looked at this beautiful living object
     beside me in silence, realising the joy of existence.
‘I did not see you at breakfast this morning?’ I said at last.
‘No,’ she answered, with the slow brilliant smile I had noted last night. ‘I was ill. It is
     an horribly unpoetic thing to suffer from, sea-sickness—the sort of thing one would like to be
     specially exempted from by Providence, but I'm not, unfortunately.’
‘I don't agree with your line of thought at all,’ I said, laughing. ‘I think those people
     that are above the ordinary weaknesses of human nature are hateful:—people with seraphic
     constitutions, that never catch an honest cold, nor have toothache, are never
      sea-sick, and never look seedy. It's annoying to ordinary
     mortals.’
The girl laughed.
‘Men don't generally like a woman to look seedy.’
‘I don't know. I think pain and suffering on a beautiful face accentuate its beauty, and it
     gives opportunity to soothe and console. I think a perfectly independent person is always
     irritating and unattractive.’
She turned to me with a marked elevation of her eyebrows and a brilliant, derisive mockery in
     her eyes.
‘Do you mean to intimate you are sympathetic?’
‘I think I am rather.’
‘You surprise me!’
‘Why?’ I asked.
‘I never met a man who was so yet.’
‘I am sure you must have had tremendous experience!’ I said mockingly, watching the
      vermilion, elliptical lines of her mouth form and vanish and
     form again as she smiled and talked.
‘Perhaps not,’ she answered. ‘A little goes a long way.’
She spoke with a charming smile and in a light, easy tone, but my ear detected the accent of
     genuine contempt in it—not the emphasised contempt displayed for bravado of something really
     half admired, but the indulgent contempt of absolute indifference.
And it stimulated me. I was so thoroughly accustomed to the anxious servility which
     characterises the ordinary young girl's conversation with men that this new tone of faint,
     slighting disdain struck me directly.
It was not pleasant; on the contrary, it was irritating and uncomfortable, but at least it
     was a change.
I did not answer, but just leant back and looked at her, and wondered what was the source of
     this contempt.

I felt it was not the mere arrogance of a good-looking woman accustomed to flattery and
     attention.
That subtle inflexion of scorn in the clear voice was the unconscious expression of a genuine
     indifference for that which is known to be worthless.
And I felt, too, as I watched the gleaming eyes that had turned from mine, and were now
     absently fixed on the distant sky-line, that there was another spring to this emotion—a
     knowledge of worth within erself.
Our chairs remained side by side all through the morning, and we talked in a lazy, desultory
     way at intervals without either of us taking the trouble to sustain a continuous conversation,
     and when the luncheon-bell rang we went down together, to find that we sat opposite each
     other.
That evening after dinner I strolled up on deck. It seemed too hot for the smoking-
      room to be attractive—besides, where was Eurydice?
     Instinctively I wanted to see her again.
The middle part of the deck, where I came up, seemed deserted, and I stood for a minute at
     the side, noting the splendour of the night. It was the splendour of the tropics.
A huge saffron moon rolled downwards through the purple sky that hung low over the ship, like
     a dark, inflated curtain, and seemed to quiver and pulsate with the ceaseless, restless light
     of its stars and planets.
The air was heavy and oppressive, almost sulphurous, like the air at the mouth of a
     crater.
As I stood watching the indolent, black water undulating silently away to the dark horizon,
     the faint, tinkling notes of a banjo came down to me from the forward part of the ship.
I listened, and then the words reached me,
      ‘She told me her age was five-and-twenty!’ sung with much
     spirit and rapidity.
I laughed and walked forward in the direction of the sound.
The passengers had gathered at this end of the ship, and were clustered together in groups or
     lines in their deck-chairs.
It was dusky; there was no artificial light here, and the moon, hastening headlong downwards
     to the sea, only gave an uncertain, transverse light across the smooth rolling waves.
I wound in and out amongst the chairs, following the sound, and reached a little group of
     four at the extreme end of the vessel.
One of that group was Eurydice. She was sitting looking down the ship, and she smiled as she
     saw me come up.
She was sitting on a camp-stool seemingly, and leaning against the bulwarks. Dickinson and
     another man were balanced on the top bar
      of the rail, and a girl of about nineteen sat cross-legged on
     the deck, the banjo she had just finished playing in her lap, and the cigar she had just
     lighted in her mouth.
All were smoking, in fact, except Eurydice. Beside them, on an empty tar-barrel turned up,
     stood four cups of coffee and a slim liqueur-bottle.
Dickinson looked across at me from his perch and laughed.
‘Don't you think we look comfortable?’ he asked.
‘Extremely,’ I said, glancing over them. ‘Shall I disturb you?’
‘Not a bit,’ answered the girl with the banjo. ‘Come and sit down à
      la Afghan, it's a nice steady position, and have a cigar!’
She looked up at me smiling, and laid her hand on the deck beside her with a gesture of
     invitation. I glanced down upon her. She was handsome, very, or at any rate looked so
      at that moment, with her eyes full of animated impertinence,
     a flush on either cheek, and the light brown curls of her close-cropped hair gently stirred by
     the night wind as the rolling ship bore onwards.
She had disdained to dress for dinner, and still wore her morning shirt and collar, with a
     man's red tie knotted round her neck, and she sat cross-legged with the cigar in her mouth,
     reminding one of the American girl, slang, modern fastness, and other disagreeable things.
I looked at the woman directly facing her. Eurydice was leaning forward, her elbow resting on
     her knee and her chin supported on her hand, looking down the length of the ship. Her black
     hair was parted in the middle and lay heavy above the narrow forehead and long eyebrows.
Her arms and neck were bare, and their whiteness hardly defined itself from the whiteness of
     her dress.

Just so might the real Eurydice have sat and looked, gazing down one of the green alleys of
     Greece. The thought shot across me for one moment, and it seemed while these two women sat
     opposite each other as if two centuries had been brought face to face, the century of Orpheus
     and the nineteenth, and the intermediate centuries no longer rolled between.
I felt disinclined to plant myself cross-legged beside this girl and smoke beneath this other
     woman's eyes, and I glanced round for a chair.
Failing this there was a second empty barrel which I drew close to Eurydice's side and sat
     down.
A slight contraction of her eyebrows answered the hot flush that leapt to the other girl's
     face as I refused her invitation, and I saw Eurydice resented the slight to her friend.
A glance at the two faces was enough to guide me, and I leant forward to the girl with a
     smile.

‘It isn't everyone who can sit àla Afghan with the same
     grace and look as graceful as you do.’
The girl laughed and twitched round a peg of the banjo.
‘Well, take care you don't topple off that tar-barrel; that will look less graceful still!’
     she answered, and there was a general laugh.
‘Sing us something else, Amy,’ Eurydice said after a minute.
‘I've come to the end of my répertoire,’ the girl
     returned.
‘You sing something,’ and she handed the banjo up towards her companion, holding it by the
     neck.
Eurydice laid a white hand on the silver edge of the instrument as it touched her knees.
‘I can't sing to the banjo,’ she said, smiling. ‘I would if my guitar were here.’
‘Can I fetch it for you?’ I said hastily.
‘Oh no, I won't trouble you,’ she said.

The other girl sprang to her feet.
‘I'll go,’ she said, ‘I know where it is,’ and she disappeared.
It seemed quite natural that that little girl should race away to fetch the guitar while the
     other leant back undisturbed.
The men smoked in silence. Eurydice said nothing, and her eyes were turned away from us to
     the lustrous Southern sky. She was one of those peculiar people who don't speak unless they
     have something to say. As for me, I felt a remark addressed to her ought to be one really worth
     listening to, and not being prepared with one to meet such an unusual requirement, I also
     stared respectfully at the stars and said nothing.
After a few seconds the girl came back with the guitar.
‘Thank you so much, dear,’ Eurydice said, as she took it; and I envied that girl as I
     heard.
There was another interval while Eurydice
      raised the strings and tuned them; then suddenly, when the
     whole was in accord, she looked up from the instrument.
‘I don't think it's much use my singing after all,’ she said. ‘It will only depress you. All
     my songs are so melancholy.’
There was an eager chorus of persuasion.
‘Oh, do,’ said the girl, who had taken up her position again at the other's feet.
‘It won't depress us. What does it matter? —there's nothing in a song.’
Eurydice said no more. She struck a few notes, and I recognised the opening of Schubert's
      Adieu.
A complete silence fell on us. No one stirred.
The men ceased even to smoke, and in an absolute hush the first liquid notes of the
      Adieu came to us, seeming to divide softly the still dark air.
Her voice was incomparable in speaking
      even, and exercised a great influence over me, and now as the
     stream of sound swelled from her throat and flowed from her lips, each delicate musical note
     seemed like a link in a chain of subtle enchantment falling on me as I heard 
‘Farewell, thou waitest for me,
Soon, soon I shall depart.’

She was singing with no music, and her gaze looked out straight before her in the night. As
     she sang those words, a tremor as of passionate agonised longing vibrated through them. They
     came from her parted lips as the restless sigh of a spirit longing to escape.
The long-drawn sorrowful notes, and the indefinable accent of sadness she weighted them with,
     went down the length of the ship, and slowly from all parts of it the passengers gathered
     silently and pressed round in a circle to listen.

Glancing round at the end of the first verse, I saw our little group was surrounded by a ring
     of eager hearers.
As the last note of the voice died, no one stirred or spoke; the sobbing accompaniment of the
     guitar was the only sound.
Eurydice, evidently absolutely oblivious of her audience, absorbed in the rapt enthusiasm of
     the song, played on that marvellous music of Schubert that represents so exactly the convulsive
     sobs, the falling tears of the lover at the death-bed of his love.
And Eurydice played it, with the strings thrilling and quivering under her passionate touch
     till the sense of music was lost, and only the great agonised sobs of a breaking human heart
     seemed throbbing through the night.
The crowd stood motionless, breathless, as one man. Every face was pale, Eurydice's own was
     blanched to the tint of death, her
      throat and bosom heaving, her eyes swimming in tears as she
     raised them towards the East to commence the last verse.

‘Farewell until the dawning of the Eternal Day.’

There was no tremor now in the perfect voice: it welled upwards in a strain of ecstatic
     triumph, growing louder and clearer in a rapture of Faith, then it sank slowly with the words 
‘The day that shall re-unite me
For ever unto thee,’
 with an infinite resignation in its tone, and the last line came softly to us as a
     mere breath, a sigh of tenderness, dying in its own measureless sadness.
For some minutes there was no sound or movement amongst her audience, then everybody drew a
     long breath, and Eurydice herself started up with a smile, and the tears glistening on her
     cheeks.

‘A most artistic performance!’ said a man next me.
The others clapped enthusiastically. Eurydice holding the guitar, tried to see an exit, but
     she was completely closed in by an admiring circle.
‘Oh do grant us another.’
‘Oh do sing once more.’
But Eurydice was immovable.
‘No, I can't, really,’ she said smiling, in answer, and then, as they pressed further—
‘I can't; I'm not up to it.’
I looked keenly at her as I heard, and I saw it was the simple truth: her slight hand
     quivered nervously on the neck of the guitar and the other arm that hung at her side trembled
     visibly; her face had not recovered its natural colouring.
Conventional expressions of regret on all sides followed this statement, soothing murmurs of
     admiration and sympathy circulated
      round her, and the groups of men reluctantly parted and made
     way for her to pass through them.
I said nothing nor stirred from my original position, but I rose as she passed and looked at
     her, and our glance met for a second.
‘I am so glad you liked it,’ she said with a smile, answering my eyes.
The little girl with the banjo followed her, and the two women disappeared.
‘Remarkably fine voice, so flexible.’
‘Yes, she's a thorough artist too.’
‘She rather overstrained herself.’
‘Who is she?’
‘She joined the ship at Aden....’
I walked away, disliking to hear her commented upon, and made my way to another part of the
     ship and sat down in an ownerless deck-chair close to the bulwarks.
I leant back, the Adieu still ringing in my ears, those sobbing notes still
     beating through
      my brain, and the delicate, finely cut scarlet lips that had
     uttered them still before my vision.
It was not long before Dickinson found me out.
He came sauntering up with his hands in his pockets and a cigarette in his teeth.
‘So there you are,’ he exclaimed.
‘When you disappeared, I thought you were overcome with your feelings. I rushed down to your
     cabin with a smelling-bottle and Miss Williamson's eau de
      cologne to revive you.’
‘Not quite so bad as that,’ I answered idly.
‘Everybody's cleared off now,’ he remarked; ‘come and take a turn round. I find one gets
     confoundedly little exercise on board ship.’
I got up and lighted a cigar and joined him.
‘Do you know, I always thought it impossible I should marry,’ I said as we walked
      along the silent, deserted deck. ‘I always hated the idea; I
     never could understand how men could ... but I believe I do understand now.’
‘And the charming Dicey has helped to enlighten you I suppose?’ answered Dickinson
     mockingly.
‘Well, it is very odd,’ I said, following up the thread of my own reflections, and
     indifferent to his chaff.
‘Of all the women I've known, admired, even loved, I suppose in a way, there has not been one
     who has not caused me a shudder when I've imagined her just for an instant as my wife, boxed up
     with me in perpetuity, not one ... until now.’
‘And you mean this, what's her name, Eurydice is the one whom you'd rather fancy in the
     position?’
‘Oh, I don't know that I go as far as that, but she's certainly totally different from any
      other woman I've ever met. I mean I can imagine her carrying
     a man away into any folly—even marriage.’
‘Yes. She is a divine creation, I admit, most impressive and very nice at a safe distance,
     but do you know I think she'd be rather an awful sort of person to marry! Fancy coming home
     late, drunk, and seeing her sitting waiting for one with that marble face and those level
     eyebrows.’
‘Well,’ I answered with a quick flush of pleasure as a vision of her, so waiting, and rising
     with soft arms outstretched in greeting, formed itself before me at his words. ‘But it isn't
     everyone who wants to come home late, drunk.’
Dickinson laughed good-naturedly.
‘Quite right, old man, it isn't. I daresay she'd do all right for you; the little one is more
     my style, she's a touch of the barmaid about her: keep you cheerful.’

‘But we were talking about marriage,’ I persisted. ‘Surely when one marries one does not want
     a repetition of the women one may have known before marriage?’
‘Yes, I should,’ observed Dickinson sententiously. ‘I like what I am accustomed to.’
‘Oh, of course, if you do!’ I rejoined, with a shrug of my shoulders. ‘I should prefer a
     change.’
‘You'll certainly get it,’ laughed Dickinson, ‘out of Miss Williamson. I should say she's
     unique.’
I stopped and leant over the bulwarks, looking through the violet darkness of the night, and
     Dickinson paused beside me, kicking the lowest iron rail with his foot.
‘I say, I find it's getting rather chilly! Don't you think the smoking-room would be an
     improvement?’
I did not think it would, and said so.
‘I see you are determined on doing the
      sentimental, so I won't stay and disturb you,’ and he
     strolled away down towards the saloon.
I leant there thinking; perhaps I was in a sentimental mood. At any rate I felt no
     inclination to sleep, if that is any sign of it, and I was indifferent to the chilliness of the
     air, though the coldest hour of the night was approaching. I felt the night dew lying thickly
     on the bulwarks, and my own clothes were wet with it.
I was thinking of Dickinson's words, ‘she's unique.’
Certainly she was different, incomparably different, from every other woman I had met, and
     her influence upon me different from that which any other woman had possessed over me, and I
     asked myself with a half-mocking smile, ‘Was she,’ perhaps in accordance with the theory of the
     greatest writer upon love in all the ages, ‘the missing portion of my own broken and incomplete
     being, that craved to recover
      her and take her again to itself and to restore its wholeness
     and entirety?’
As I stood there balancing idly with myself questions to which the human brain is inexorably
     forbidden to supply the answer, faint, broken shafts of light began to tremble above the dark
     line of the horizon in the East, and I turned to it to watch with curious eyes the rising of
     the Young Day.
Slowly the overhanging blackness of the night and the reflected blackness of the sea
     lightened, and the whole darkness of the sky at the first touch of dawn seemed to quiver even
     as a great curtain grasped by some vast, withdrawing hand.
Slowly, imperceptibly, with invisibly vanishing folds, the veil was gathered back, and the
     shadowy surface of the wide, dim mirror of the sea gleamed faintly with translucent, opaline,
     tints of grey.
Then, suddenly, as swords flashed from their
      sheaths, shot up three bars of crimson light obliquely from
     the dark sea line to the empyrean, transforming the uncertain, trembling pallor and shades of
     the water into one soft, subtle mysterious harmony of mauve.
Smooth, almost motionless, the sea lay, yet swelling, palpitating gently, trembling and
     blushing under the caresses of the Dawn. For some moments, the water stretched, a glimmering
     circle of violet to the horizon, then, unhesitatingly, triumphantly, with overpowering
     sovereignty, the great Day rose in its mantle of clear light.
The purples and the shadows fled, the wavering tints and shades vanished into one brilliance
     of purest gold, the sea seemed to laugh openly as the fresh day breeze swept over it.
Small crests of white foam leapt up and smiling dimples and hollows sparkled between.
The subdued and tender sadness, the ever
      marvellous mystery of the dawn was past. It was glad, joyous,
     certain Morning that smiled now upon the sea.
I raised my arms from the railing and turned to go down to my cabin, a confident gladness in
     my heart.
Full of human egoism, I felt vaguely as if this heavenly awakening was typical of the dawn of
     a new era in my life.
