
A BOY ABOUT TOWN
 The young Westminsters had not come in when Pocket finally cast up in St. John's Wood Park.
     But their mother was at home, and she gave the boy a cup of tepid tea out of a silver tea-pot
     in the drawing-room. Mrs. Knaggs was a large lady who spoke her mind with much freedom, at all
     events to the young. She remarked how much Upton (so she addressed him) had altered; but her
     tone left Pocket in doubt as to whether any improvement was implied. She for one did not
     approve of his luncheon in Oxford Street, much less of the way
      he had spent a summer's afternoon; indeed, she rather wondered at his being
     allowed alone in London at all. Pocket, who could sometimes shine in conversation with his
     elders, at once reminded Mrs. Knaggs that her own Westminster boys were allowed alone in London
     every day of their lives. But Mrs. Knaggs said that was a very different thing, and that she
     thought Pocket's public school must be very different from Westminster. Pocket bridled, but
     behaved himself; he knew where he wanted to stay the night, and got as far towards inviting
     himself as to enlarge upon Mr. Coverley's misfortune and his own disappointment. Mrs. Knaggs in
     her turn did ask him where he meant to and even the conscientious Pocket caught himself
     declaring he had no idea. Then the boys were heard returning, and Mrs. Knaggs said of course he
     would stop to schoolroom supper, and Pocket thanked her as properly as though it were the
     invitation he made sure must follow. After all, Vivian Knaggs had stayed at Pocket's three
     weeks one Christmas, and Guy a fortnight at Easter; the boys themselves would think of that; it
     was not a matter to broach to them, or one to worry about, prematurely. 
 Vivian and Guy were respectively rather older and rather younger than Pocket, and they came
     in looking very spruce, the one in his Eton jacket, the
      other in tails, but both in shiny toppers that excited an unworthy prejudice in
     the wearer of the green tie with red spots. They seemed very glad to see him, however, and the
     stiffness was wearing off even before Pocket produced his revolver in the basement room where
     the two Westminsters prepared their lessons and had their evening meal. 
 The revolver melted the last particle of ice, though Vivian Knaggs pronounced it an old
     pin-firer, and Guy said he would not fire it for a thousand pounds. This only made Pocket the
     more eager to show what he and his revolver were made of, then and there in the garden, and the
     more confident that it never would be heard in the house. 
 “It would,” answered Vivian, “and seen as well. No, if you want to have a shot let's stick
     up a target outside this window, and fire from just inside.” 
 The window was a French one leading into the back garden; but, unhappily, Mrs. Knaggs's
     bedroom was only two floors higher, and it also looked out on the back; and Mrs. Knaggs herself
     was in her room and near her window when the report startled her, and not less because she
     little dreamt what it was until she looked out in time to see a cloud of smoke escaping from
     the schoolroom window, and Pocket examining the target, weapon in hand. 
 There was a great scene about it. Mrs. Knaggs
      shrieked a prohibition from aloft, and having pacified an incoherent cook upon the
     stairs, descended to extract a solemn promise which might well have ended the matter. Pocket
     was very contrite, indeed, drew his weapon's teeth with a promptitude that might have been his
     death, and offered it and them to be placed under lock and key until he left. But Mrs. Knaggs
     contented herself with promoting a solemn promise into a Sacred Word of Honour—which rather
     hurt poor Pocket—and with sending him a very straight message by Vivian after supper. 
 “The mater's awfully sorry,” said Vivian, returning from a mission which Pocket had been
     obliged to instigate after all. “There's not a spare bed in the house.” 
 Guy incontinently declared there was. A fraternal frown alone prevented him from going into
     particulars. 
 “A sofa would do me all right,” suggested Pocket, who had long ago lost his last train, and
     would have preferred a bare plank where there were boys to fussy old Miss Harbottle's best bed.
     But Vivian Knaggs shook his head. 
 “The mater says she couldn't sleep with firearms in the house.” 
 “I'll bury them in the garden if she likes.” 
 “Then you smoke in the night, and at Coverley's you once walked in your sleep,” pursued
     Vivian,
      who certainly seemed to have been urging the interloper's cause. “And the mater's
     afraid you might walk out of a window or set the house on fire.” 
 “I shouldn't do either to-night,” protested Pocket, with a grin. “I've not got anything to
     smoke, and I have got something to keep me quiet.” 
 And with further information on both points the son of the house went upstairs again, only
     to return in quicker time with a more embarrassed gravity. 
 “She's awfully sorry,” he said unconvincingly, “but she can't undertake the responsibility
     of putting you up with your asthma.” 
 Oddly enough, for he was only too sensitive on some points, Pocket was not really hurt by
     his treatment at the hands of these people; he felt he had made rather a mistake, but not that
     he had been most inhumanly cast adrift at sixteen among the shoals and quicksands of London.
     Nor was this quite the case as yet; there was still old Miss Harbottle in Wellington Road. But
     to her he was not going until decency compelled him; he was going to have another game of
     bagatelle with Guy Knaggs first. It will be seen that with all his sensibilities the youngest
     Upton was a most casual and sanguine youth. He took a great deal for granted, prepared only for
     the best, and although inclined to worry over the irrevocable, took no thought for the morrow
     until he was obliged. He was sorry he had been so
      positive with Spearman on the subject of his friend's hospitality. He was sorry he
     had asked and been refused, rather sorry he had not caught that last train back from St.
     Pancras. Yet he left poor Miss Harbottle the best part of another hour to go to bed in; and
     that was neither the first nor the last of his erratic proceedings. 
 “What about your luggage?” asked the elder Knaggs, as he put on his hat to walk round with
     Pocket. 
 “Good Lord!” cried that worthy, standing still in the hall. 
 “Haven't you got any?” 
 “I left it at Madame Tussaud's!” 
 “Left your luggage there?” 
 “It was only a handbag. How long are they open?” 
 Young Knaggs looked in Whitaker and said they closed at ten. There was still time
     to recover the bag with a taxicab, but in that case it was not much use his going too. So they
     said goodbye at the Swiss Cottage, and the adventures of Pocket Upton began in earnest. 
 Old Miss Harbottle, his mother's great friend, would have none of him either! He stopped on
     the way to Baker Street to make sure. The garden gate was one that only opened by a catch and a
     cable manipulated indoors. The downstairs lights
      were out. The gate opened at last, a light shone through the front door, and the
     door opened a few inches on the chain. Pocket confronted a crevice of quilted dressing-gown and
     grey curls; but his mother's friend's mastiff was making night so hideous within, and trying so
     hard to get at his mother's son, that it was some time before he could exchange an intelligible
     word with the brute's mistress. It was not a satisfactory interchange then, for Miss Harbottle
     at first flatly refused to believe that this was Tony Upton, whom she had not seen since his
     preparatory schooldays, and she seemed inclined to doubt it to the end. Upton or no Upton, she
     could not take him in. She had no sheets aired, no fire to air them at, and the cook had just
     left. Miss Harbottle's cook had always just left, except when she was just leaving. The
     rejected visitor got an instant's fun out of the reflection as he returned to his palpitating
     taxicab. 
 His position was now quite serious. He had not many shillings in his purse. The only thing
     to do was to put up at Shaw's Hotel, Trafalgar Square; that was where his people always stayed,
     where every servant was supposed to know them all. He pushed on at once through the cool June
     night, and paid away three of his last shillings for the drive. Alas! not a bed to be had at
     Shaw's; it was the worst time of the year, they told him, and he
      supposed they meant the best. He also supposed there had been changes in the
     staff, for nobody seemed to know his name as well as he had been led to expect at home. 
 They were quite nice about it. They pointed out the big hotels opposite, and recommended
     more than one of the little ones in Craven Street. But the big hotels were all full to
     overflowing; and at the only little one he tried the boy lost his temper like a man on being
     requested to deposit six shillings before proceeding to his room. Pocket had not got it to
     deposit, and the galling reflection caused him to construe the demand as a deliberate
     reflection upon his outward respectability—as if he could not have borrowed the money from Dr.
     Bompas in the morning! 
 “I'll see you blowed,” was his muttered reply, and he caught up his bag in a passion. 
 “All right, little man! I shouldn't be rude about it,” said the dapper cashier. “If I
     couldn't pay my shot I should sleep in the Park, on a nice fine night like this.” 
 “I shall!” shouted Pocket through his teeth, as though that would prevent the brute of a
     cashier from sleeping soundly in his bed. And it was his own idle and childish threat that set
     him presently wondering what else he was to do. He had the spirit of adventure, as we have
     seen. 

 He had the timorous, or let us say, the imaginative temperament, which lends to adventure
     its very salt. He wished to have done dangerous or heroic things, if not to have to do them. He
     had so little to boast about; his brothers, and so many other fellows of his own age, had so
     much. It would make a great yarn some day, how he had come up from school to see a doctor—and
     slept in the Park! 
 Meanwhile he had only a vague idea of his way there; he knew hardly anything of London
     except St. John's Wood and his present landmark of the Nelson column and the Landseer lions. He
     knew them from having stayed some time (under another doctor) as a child at Shaw's Hotel. But,
     I say! What would Bompas say to his sleeping out, and what sort of night could he expect in the
     open air? 
 He had an overcoat. It had been in his way all day; it would come in more than handy for the
     night. And it suddenly struck Pocket, with all the force of a forgotten novelty, that he had a
     revolver and cartridges as well. 
 That decided him. Not that he seriously thought himself the kind of person to use a revolver
     with resolution or effect; but it made him feel doughty and even truculent to find the means of
     heroic defence all ready to his hand. He began to plume himself on his providential purchase.
     He would sell his young life dearly if he fell among London thieves;
      in his death he would not be unhonoured at school or at home. Obituary phrases of
     a laudatory type sprang like tears to a mind still healthy enough to dash them away again, as
     though they had been real tears; but it was with all the nervous exaltation of the unsuspected
     desperado that he inquired his way of a colossal constable at the corner of Pall Mall and the
     Haymarket. 
 The man wanted to know if he meant Hyde Park Corner. “Yes,” said Pocket, hastily, because
     his heart was in his mouth and the policeman looked as though he had seen it there. And he
     overshot the mark in the motor omnibus through being ashamed to ask again, only alighting at
     Albert Gate; but here there was quite a little stream of decent people to follow without
     further tremors into the indubitable Park. 
 He followed them across the drive and across Rotten Row, gaining confidence as he went. In a
     minute it was all delightful; his eyes were turned outward by all there was to see; and now his
     chief fear was lest some one or other of the several passers should stand in his path and ask
     what he was doing there. He was still afraid of speaking or being spoken to, but no longer
     unreasonably so. Detection as an escaped schoolboy was his one great dread; he felt he was
     doing something for which he might be expelled. 

 But nobody took any notice of him; this gradually encouraged him to take more notice of
     other people, when he found, not altogether to his surprise, that the majority of those passing
     through the Park at that late hour were hardly of his own class. So much the more infinitesimal
     were the chances of his being recognised or even suspected for what he was. There were young
     men in straw hats, there were red-coated soldiers, and there were girls. They all filled the
     schoolboy with their fascinating possibilities. They were Life. The boy's heart beat at what he
     heard and saw. The couples were hilarious and unrefined. One wench, almost under his nose, gave
     her soldier a slap with such a remark as Pocket had never heard from a woman's lips before. He
     turned away, tingling, and leant upon the parapet of a bridge he had been in the act of
     crossing, and thought of school and home and Mr. Coverley. 
 It was not really a bridge at all. It was only the eastern extremity of the Serpentine; but
     as the boy leant over the stone balustrade, and gazed upon the artificial flood, broadening out
     indefinitely in the darkness, it might have been the noblest river in the world. Its banks were
     muffled in a feather boa of trees, bedizened by a chain of many lights; the lights of a real
     bridge made a diadem in the distance; and between these sped
      the lamps of invisible vehicles, like fretful fireflies. And the still water gave
     back every glimmer with its own brilliance, unchallenged and undimmed by moon or star, for not
     a trace of either was in the sky; and yet it was the most wonderful sky the boy had ever seen—a
     black sky tinged with sullen rose, or a red sky seen through smoked glasses, he hardly knew
     which he would have called it. But he did know that warm and angry glow for the reflection of
     London's light and life; he could not forget he was in London for a moment. Her mighty
     machinery with its million wheels throbbed perpetually in his ears; and yet between the beats
     would come the quack of a wild duck near at hand, the splash of a leaping fish, the plaintive
     whistle of water-fowl: altogether such a chorus of incongruities as was not lost upon our very
     impressionable young vagabond. The booming strokes of eleven recalled him to a sense of time
     and his immediate needs. His great adventure was still before him; he pushed on, bag in hand,
     to select its scene. Another road he crossed, alive with the lamps of cyclists, and came
     presently upon a wide space intersected with broad footpaths from which he shrank; it was
     altogether too public here; he was approaching an exposed corner in an angle of lighted
     streets, with the Marble Arch at its apex, as a signboard made quite clear. He had come right
     across the Park; back over the
      grass, keeping rather more to the right, in the direction of those trees, was the
     best thing now. 
 It was here that he found the grass distinctly damp; this really was enough to deter an
     asthmatic, already beginning to feel asthmatical. Pocket Upton, however, belonged to the large
     class of people, weak and strong alike, who are more than loth to abandon a course of action
     once taken. It would have required a very severe attack to baulk him of his night out and its
     subsequent description to electrified ears. But when bad steering had brought him up at the
     bandstand, the deserted chairs seemed an ordained compromise between prudence and audacity, and
     he had climbed into the fenced enclosure when another enormous policeman rose up horribly in
     its midst. 
 “What are you doing here?” inquired this policeman, striding upon Pocket with inexorable
     tread. 
 “No harm, I hope,” replied our hero humbly, but with unusual readiness. 
 “Nor no good either, I'll be bound!” said the policeman, standing over him. 
 “I was only going to sit down,” protested Pocket, having satisfied his conscience that in
     the first place that was all he really had been going to do. 
 “There are plenty of places to sit down,” rejoined the policeman. “You're not allowed in
     here.
      And unless you look sharp about it you won't have time to sit down at all.” 
 “Why not?” 
 “The Park closes at twelve.” 
 “Closes?” 
 “At twelve o'clock, and it's half-past eleven now.” The boy's heart sank into his wet boots.
     Here was an end of all his dashing plans. He was certain he had heard or read of people
     sleeping in the Park; he had looked upon it as a vast dormitory of the houseless; that was the
     only reason he was there. The offensive clerk in the hotel had evidently entertained the same
     belief. This idiot of a policeman must be wrong. But he seemed quite clear about it. 
 “Did you think we were open all night?” he inquired with a grin. 
 “I did,” said Pocket; and he was inspired to add, “I even thought a lot of loafers used to
     sleep here all night!” 
 The policeman chuckled aloud. 
 “They may if they get up the trees; that's about their only chance,” said he. 
 “You search the whole place so thoroughly?” 
 “We keeps our eyes open,” said the policeman significantly, and Pocket asked no more
     questions; he scaled the forbidden fence and made off with the alacrity of one who meant to go
     out before he was
      put out. Such was his then sincere and sound intention. But where next to turn, to
     what seat on the Embankment, or what arch in the slums, in his ignorance of London he had no
     idea. 
 Meanwhile, to increase the irony of his dilemma, now that he was bent on quitting the Park
     he found himself striking deeper and deeper into its heart. He skirted a building, left it
     behind and out of sight, and drifted before the wind of destiny between an upright iron fence
     on one hand and a restricted open space upon the other. He could no longer see a single light;
     but the ground rose abruptly across the fence, and was thick with shrubs. Men might have been
     lying behind those shrubs, and Pocket could not possibly have seen them from the path. Did the
     policeman mean to tell him that he or his comrades were going to climb every fence and look
     behind every bush in Hyde Park? 
 Pocket came to anchor with a new flutter at his heart. This upright fence was not meant for
     scaling; it was like a lot of area palings, as obvious and intentional an obstacle. And the
     whole place closed at twelve, did it? The flutter became a serious agitation as Pocket saw
     himself breaking the laws of the land as well as those of school, saw himself not only expelled
     but put in prison! Well, so much the better for his story so long as those
      penalties were not incurred; even if they were, so much the greater hero he! 
 No wonder his best friends called him disparaging names; he was living up to the hardest of
     them now, and he with asthma on him as it was! But the will was on him too, the obstinate and
     reckless will, and the way lay handy in the shape of a row of Park chairs which Pocket had just
     passed against the iron palings. He went back to them, mounted on the first chair, wedged his
     bag between two of the spikes, set foot on the back of the chair, and somehow found himself on
     the other side without rent or scratch. Then he listened; but not a step could he hear. So then
     the cunning dog put his handkerchief through the palings and wiped the grit from the chair on
     which he had stood. And they called him a conscientious ass at school! 
 But then none of these desperate deeds were against his conscience, and they had all been
     thrust on Pocket Upton by circumstances over which he had lost control when the last train went
     without him from St. Pancras. They did not prevent him from kneeling down behind the biggest
     bush that I he could find, before curling up underneath it; neither did his prayers prevent him
     from thinking—even on his knees—of his revolver, nor yet—by the force of untimely
     association—of the other revolvers in the Chamber of Horrors. He saw those waxen
      wretches huddled together in ghastly groups, but the thought of them haunted him
     less than it might have done in a feather bed; he had his own perils and adventures to consider
     now. One thing, however, did come of the remembrance; he detached the leather strap he wore as
     a watch-guard. And used it to strap a pin-fire revolver, loaded in every chamber, to his wrist
     instead. 
 That was the last but one of the silly boy's proceedings under the bush; the last of all was
     to drain the number-one draught prescribed by Bompas in the morning, and to fling away the
     phial. The stuff was sweet and sticky in the mouth, and Pocket felt a singular and most
     grateful warmth at his extremities as he curled up in his overcoat. It was precisely then that
     he heard a measured tread approaching, and held his breath until it had passed without a pause.
     Yet the danger was still audible when the boy dropped off, thinking no more about it, but of
     Mr. Coverley and Charles Peace and his own people down in Leicestershire. 
