
A THIRD CASE
 In days to come, when the boy had schooled himself not to speak of these days, nor to let
     his mind dwell on their mystery and terror, it was as a day of dark hours and vivid moments
     that he remembered the one which Phillida and he began alone together in her uncle's house.
     Those endless hours were either mercifully forgotten or else contracted to an endurable
     minimum; but the unforgettable moments would light themselves up in his memory without a detail
     missing. 
 There was their first encounter at the dark-room door, and Phillida standing all but
     barefoot in the ruby light, with her glorious hair about her shoulders, a picture that could
     never fade. Then there was the moment of the incriminating print, which the sun wiped out even
     as Phillida stood with it in her hands. That moment merged itself in the greater one of his
     discovery that the revolver was fully loaded, his inspiration that neither it nor he had done
     the fatal mischief in the Park. Then she was begging him to go (she who would keep him the time
     before!) and he entreating her to come with him, and neither giving way an inch, so that they
     quarrelled just when they should have stuck
      together, and she ran away in tears, and he stayed below in a glow of anger which
     dissolved his fears like snow in May. 
 That was the beginning of a black hour and more. Phillida was never to be forgiven, then; he
     was staying there at his peril, staying absolutely on her account, and so far from giving him
     the slightest credit for it, or a single word of encouragement, she said all sorts of things
     and was off before he could answer one of them. It was not for Pocket to see the many ironies
     of that moment, and not for him to recognise the tonic property of his heroic grievance. He
     could only see himself at the foot of those stairs, first gnashing his teeth and not sorry he
     had made her cry, then sitting down with his eye on the front door, revolver in hand, to await
     the click of the doctor's key. Another click was to answer it; and at the point of the cocked
     revolver Baumgartner was to have made a clean breast of his crimes, not only to the
     giant-killer at the foot of the stairs but to the girl he meant to call to witness with her own
     ears. 
 Pocket saw himself a desperate character just then, and one not incapable of desperate
     action had the climax only come at once. But he had more than an hour of it alone at his post;
     he had a whole hot forenoon of unmitigated suspense, of sickening alarms from tradesmen's
     carts, boys
      whistling past the house as though they were not in a wicked world at all, and
     then a piano-organ that redoubled his watchfulness, and spoilt some tunes for him for ever.
     Once he did hear shambling feet on the very steps outside. Once was quite enough, though it was
     but an advertisement for cast-off clothing (and false teeth) that came fluttering through the
     letter-box. Pocket was left in such a state that he would not have backed himself to hit the
     door from the stairs; and he put the chain on it, thinking to interview the doctor over that,
     in the manner of old Miss Harbottle. 
 So it happened that the first significant sound was entirely lost upon him, because he was
     listening for one so much nearer at hand, until Phillida ran downstairs and almost over him
     where he sat. 
 He got up to make way stiffly, but a glance assured him that the quarrel was over on her
     side. The great eyes were fixed appealingly upon him, but with a distressing look which he had
     done nothing to provoke. Not before then was he aware of another duet between newsboys coming
     nearer and nearer, and shouting each other down as they came. 
 “You hear that?” she whispered, as if not to drown a note. 
 “I do now.” 
 “Do you hear what it is?” 

 Pocket listened, and caught a word he was not likely to miss. 
 “Something fresh about the murder,” said he grimly. 
 “No; it's another one,” she shuddered. “Can't you hear? “Another awful murder!” Now they're
     saying something else.” 
 “It is something about the Park.” Pocket stuck to his idea. 
 “And something else about some “well-known”—I can't hear what!” 
 “No more can I.” 
 “I'll open the door.” 
 She opened it on the chain as he had left it. That did not help them. The shouting had
     passed the end of their quiet road. It was dying away again in the distance. 
 “I must go out and get one,” said Phillida. “Some well-known man!” 
 “You're not thinking of the doctor, surely?” 
 “I don't know! I can't think where he is.” 
 “But you're worse than I am, if you jump to that!” said Pocket, smiling to reassure her. He
     did not smile when she had run out as she was; he had shut the door after her, and he was
     waiting to open it in a fever of impatience. 
 Dr. Baumgartner had left the house before six
      o'clock in the morning; now it was after twelve. If some tragedy had overtaken
     him in his turn, then there was an end to every terror, and for him a better end than he might
     meet with if he lived. The boy remembered Him who desireth not the death of a sinner, and was
     ashamed of his own thought; but that did not alter it. Unless his fears and his surmises were
     all equally unfounded, better for everybody, and best of all for Phillida, if this criminal
     maniac came to his end without public exposure of his crimes. Pocket may have misconceived his
     own attitude of mind, as his elders and betters do daily; he may have been thinking of his own
     skin more than he knew, or wanted to know. In that case he had his reward, for the murdered man
     was not Dr. Baumgartner. Phillida's first words on returning were to that effect; and yet she
     trembled as though they were not the truth. 
 “Who was it, then?” the schoolboy asked suspiciously. 
 “Sir Joseph Schelmerdine.” 
 “So he was the well-known man!” 
 He was well known even to the boy by name, but that was all. He had seen it in newspapers,
     and he thought he had heard it execrated by Baumgartner himself in one of his little digs at
     England. Pocket was not sure about this, but he
      mentioned his impression, and Phillida nodded with swimming eyes. 
 “Did the doctor know him?” 
 “Not personally; but he thought him a European danger.” 
 “Why?” 
 “I can't tell you. It was something to do with politics and gold-mines, and some financial
     paper. I never understood.” 
 “May I see the paper you've brought in?” 
 The girl held it tight in her hand, and tighter still as he held out his. 
 “I'd rather you didn't,” she said. 
 “Then there's something you haven't told me.” 
 “There is!” 
 “I shall know it sooner or later.” 
 “I know you will, and I know what you'll think! You may think what you like, and still be
     wrong!” 
 There was a pause between the sentences, and in the pause the boy found the paper at his
     feet. There was no need to open it at the place; it was so folded already, the news standing
     out in its leaded type, and more of it in the late corner. Sir Joseph Schelmerdine, Bart.,
     M.P., the well-known proprietor of the Money-maker, had been shot dead in front of his
     house in Park Lane. The murder had been committed in the early hours of the morning, before
     anybody was about except
      Sir Joseph and his groom, and the person whom the groom described as the only
     possible murderer. The man had just seen his master mounted for the early morning ride, and had
     left him in conversation with a photographer representing himself as concerned with the press,
     and desirous of obtaining an equestrian photograph for his paper. The groom thought it was to
     be taken in the Park, and was himself on his way back to the mews when the riderless horse
     overtook him. Mounting the animal, he had galloped round to find Sir Joseph dead in the road,
     and no trace of the “photographer” but a false beard and spectacles which he had evidently
     discarded in his flight, and which unfortunately precluded a close description of his
     appearance. But a hue and cry had been started, and it was believed that the criminal was still
     in hiding in the immediate neighbourhood, which was being subjected to a thorough search under
     the direction of responsible officers from Scotland Yard. 
 Such was the news which the young girl had shrunk from showing to her companion. She had
     left him, indeed, to read it by himself. And the next thing he remembered was finding her quite
     insensible in the big chair in the back room. 
 The afternoon was a blank broken by no more moments such as these. It was a period of dull
     misery and gnawing dread; but the pair saw
      each other through it, they were not divided any more. Now they listened for his
     step no longer, but for more newsboys crying his capture to the world. And in the hours that
     they spent thus listening, and listening, the girl had much to say, that it did her good to
     say, about this Dr. Baumgartner as she had known and almost loved him in the past. 
 Lovable, however, he had never been, though more than good and kind to her for all that. He
     had never taken her into his life, or entered into hers, in the many years they had been more
     or less together. All she really knew of him was from her mother, whose elder sister he had
     married soon after the Franco-Prussian War, and lost soon after marriage. He must have been
     settled in England many years before Phillida's mother, herself an Englishman's widow, came to
     keep house for him. The girl could not remember her father, but her mother had lived to see her
     in her teens, and in her lifetime Dr. Baumgartner had seemed much as other men. It was only of
     late years that he had withdrawn from a world in which he was justly honoured, and buried
     himself ever deeper in his books and his photographic experiments. His niece had never known
     anything of these; he had told her nothing, and she had always gone in awe of him. But he had
     sent her to school, he was going to send her
      to college, he had only just given her six months in Switzerland. It was during
     those months that all his eccentricities had become pronounced; that he had given up servants,
     and taken to doing half the work of the house himself, with the casual aid of charwomen, and
     saving the other half by having the meals in from a restaurant. Phillida had no influence with
     him in these or any other matters. She only blamed herself for not having realised the change
     in him and done more to save him from himself. He had done so much for her, whatever madness
     might have overtaken him in the end; her own kinsfolk so much less, for all their opulent
     integrity. Nothing could make her forget what he had done. She never could or would desert him;
     it was no use asking her again; but she took her callow champion's hand, and wrung it with her
     final answer, which was unaccompanied by further prayers for his departure. 
 And Pocket could understand her now, though it was no consecutive tale that he heard, but a
     very chaos of excuses and extenuations, regrets, suppositions, and not always revelant
     recollections, of which he had to make what he could in his own mind. What he made was a
     narrative so natural that he could not believe it was the life-story of a murderer. His own
     convictions became preposterous in his own eyes. What had he been thinking about all
      day? Was that the way a murderer would behave? Was this the way a murderer would
     live, in these surroundings, with those books about him, with that little billiard-table in the
     next room? Had those waxen murderers in the garish vault lived ordinary lives as well? Pocket
     had only thought of them as committing their dreadful deeds, yet now he could only think of
     Baumgartner as living this ordinary life. 
 The mood passed, but it would recur as sure as Phillida thought of something else to be said
     for Dr. Baumgartner; it was the creature of her feeling for him, and of the schoolboy's feeling
     for her. If he could have convicted himself of the fatal affair in the Park, and so cleared
     Baumgartner of all blood-guiltiness whatsoever, in that or any other case, he would have done
     it for Phillida's sake that afternoon. But with every hour of the doctor's absence suspicions
     multiplied. Phillida herself was a prey to them. She was almost as ready to recall symptoms of
     incipient insanity as instances of personal kindness; if one lost one's reason, she broke a
     long silence to contend, there could be no question of regret and wrong. She was not so sure
     about crime and punishment. Pocket, of course, said there could be no question of that either;
     but in his heart he wondered how much method they must prove to hang a madman. 

 The evening meal had been taken in, but that was all. The girl and boy had no thought of
     sitting down to it; she had made tea not long before; and strong excitement is its own meat and
     drink. They were sitting silently together in the room at the back. The scented summer dusk was
     deepening every minute. Suddenly there was a sound of small branches breaking in the garden.
     Pocket peeped out, standing back from the window at her entreaty. 
 The laburnum by the wall was shaking violently, pouring its golden rain into both gardens,
     and the bush beneath it looked alive; a tall figure rose out of it, and came creeping towards
     the little conservatory, bent double, and brushing the soil from his clothes as he advanced
     with long and stealthy strides. It was Dr. Baumgartner, in a cap pulled down over his eyes, and
     the old alpaca jacket. He had a newspaper parcel under his arm. 
 The boy and girl were in the dark angle between the window and the door; but it was only
     comparative darkness, and Baumgartner might have seen them; they were clasping hands as they
     shrank away from him with one accord. But he did not seem to see them at all. He stretched
     himself, as though he found it a relief to stand upright, and more mould trickled from his
     garments in the act; he took off the alpaca jacket, and shook it as one shakes
      a handkerchief. There could have been nothing in the pockets, certainly no
     weapon, and if he had a hip-pocket there was none in that, for his gaunt figure stood out
     plainly enough in the middle of the room. There was still the newspaper parcel; he had put it
     down on one of the walnut-tables. He now removed the paper; it fell at Pocket's feet, a
     newspaper and nothing more; and nothing had come out of it but the stereoscopic camera, that
     either watcher could detect. 
 And he passed through the room without taking the least notice of either of them, whether he
     saw them or not; and they heard him go upstairs, and shut the door, and then his footsteps
     overhead. 
 “I'll go up and tackle him at once,” said Pocket, through his set teeth; but Phillida would
     not hear of it. 
 “No! I must go first and see if there's nothing I can get him; he mayn't have had anything
     all day. There's no need for you to come at all—I believe he's forgotten all about us both!” 
 “Not he!” whispered Pocket, as the door opened overhead. “Here he comes!” 
 He could not help gripping his revolver as the stairs creaked again under Dr. Baumgartner;
     he had gripped it more than once already with the hand that was not holding Phillida's. The
     doctor was coming down in a hurry, as though he had indeed
      forgotten something. But he passed the open drawing-room door; they saw him pass,
     jingling a bunch of keys, and never so much as glancing in on the way. It was the dark-room
     door he opened. Now he would find out everything! They heard a match struck, and saw the faint
     light turn into a strong deep crimson glow. The door shut. The children stood listening in the
     dark. 
 Running water, and the chink of glass; the tapping of a stoppered bottle; the opening of the
     dark slide; these stages the younger photographer followed as though he were again looking on.
     Then there was a long period without a sound. 
 “He's developing now!” whispered Pocket, close to the folding-doors. He caught the sound of
     laboured breathing on the other side. “There it is—there it is—there it is!” cried the doctor's
     voice in mingled ecstasy and mad excitement. A deep sigh announced the blackening of the plate
     at the conclusion of the first process. A tap ran for a moment; interminable minutes ensued.
     “It's gone! It's gone again!” cried the wild voice, with a sob; “it's gone, gone, gone like all
     the rest!” 
 One listener waited for the passionate smashing of the negative as before; but that did not
     happen again; and then he wondered if it was being put straight into the rack with the others,
     if the damage
      to the locker had been discovered at last. He never knew. The door opened. The
     red glow showed for a moment in the passage, then went out. The door shut behind Baumgartner,
     and again he passed the drawing-room, a bent figure, without looking in. And the flagging step
     on the stairs bore no resemblance to the one which had come hurrying down not many minutes
     before. 
 “I must go to him!” said Phillida in broken undertones, and her grief communicated itself to
     the other young sympathetic soul, for all the base fears he had to fight alone. Personal
     safety, little as she might think of it, was the essence of her position as opposed to his; and
     he was of the type that thinks of everything. She left him listening breathless in the dark.
     And in the dark she found him when at length she returned to report the doctor busy writing at
     his desk; but a pin's head of blue gas glimmered where there had been none before, and a paper
     which had been trodden underfoot now rustled in Pocket's hand. 
 “Does he know I'm here?” he asked. 
 “I don't think so. We never mentioned you. I believe he's forgotten your existence
     altogether; he began by looking at me as though he'd forgotten mine. He says he wants nothing,
     except time to write. He seems so strange—so old!” 
 Again the break in her voice, and again the
      boyish sympathy in his. “I wonder if something would be any comfort to you?” 
 “I don't think so. What is it?” 
 “Something I saw in the paper he brought in with him. I lit the gas while you were
     upstairs.” 
 Phillida turned it out again without comment. 
 “Nothing that you saw can make any difference to me,” she sighed. 
 “Do you remember my saying there must be another man in these—mysteries?” 
 “I think I do. What difference does it make? Besides, the man you meant is in prison.” 
 “He isn't!” 
 “You said he was?” 
 “He was let out early this morning! Let me light the gas while you read it for yourself.” 
 But Phillida had no desire to read it for herself. “I doubt if there's anything in that,”
     she said; “but what if there were? Does it make it any better if a man has an accomplice in his
     crimes? If he's guilty at all, it makes it all the worse.” 

