
chapter xxxv
THE LITTLE ONES IN BULIKA
IT was early in the morning when we set out, making, between the blue sky and the green
     grass, a gallant show on the wide plain. We would travel all the morning, and rest the
     afternoon; then go on at night, rest the next day, and start again in the short twilight. The
     latter part of our journey we would endeavour so to divide as to arrive at the city with the
     first of the morning, and be already inside the gates when discovered.
It seemed as if all the inhabitants of the forest would migrate with us. A multitude of birds
     flew in front, imagining themselves, no doubt, the leading division; great companies of
     butterflies and other insects played about our heads; and a crowd of four-footed creatures
     followed us. These last, when night came, left us almost all; but the birds and the
     butterflies, the wasps and the dragon-flies, went with us to the very gates of the city.
We halted and slept soundly through the afternoon: it was our first real march, but none were
     tired. In the night we went faster, because it was cold. Many fell asleep on the backs of their
     beasts, and woke in the morning quite fresh. None tumbled off. Some rode shaggy, shambling
     bears, which yet made speed enough, going as fast as the elephants. Others were mounted on
     different kinds of deer, and would have been racing all the way had I not prevented it. Those
     atop of the hay on the elephants, unable to see the animals below them, would keep talking to
     them as long as they were awake. Once, when we had halted to feed, I heard a little fellow, as
     he drew out the hay to give him, commune thus with his "darling beast": "Nosy dear, I am
     digging you out of the mountain, and shall soon get down to you: be patient; I'm a coming! Very
     soon now you'll send up your nose to look for me, and then we'll kiss like good elephants, we
     will!"
The same night there burst out such a tumult of elephant-trumpeting, horse-neighing, and
     child-imitation, ringing far over the silent levels, that, uncertain how near the city might
     not be, I quickly stilled the uproar lest it should give warning of our approach.
Suddenly, one morning, the sun and the city rose, as it seemed, together. To the children the
     walls appeared only a great mass of rock, but when I told them the inside was full of nests of
     stone, I saw apprehension and dislike at once invade their hearts: for the first time in their
     lives, I believe—many of them long little lives—they knew fear. The place looked to them bad:
     how were they to find mothers in such a place? But they went on bravely, for they had
     confidence in Lona—and in me too, little as I deserved it.
We rode through the sounding archway. Sure never had such a drumming of hoofs, such a padding
     of paws and feet been heard on its old pavement! The horses started and looked scared at the
     echo of their own steps; some halted a moment, some plunged wildly and wheeled about; but they
     were soon quieted, and went on. Some of the Little Ones shivered, and all were still as death.
     The three girls held closer the infants they carried. All except the bears and butterflies
     manifested fear.
On the countenance of the woman lay a dark anxiety; nor was I myself unaffected by the
     general dread, for the whole army was on my hands and on my conscience: I had brought it up to
     the danger whose shadow was now making itself felt! But I was supported by the thought of the
     coming kingdom of the Little Ones, with the bad giants its slaves, and the animals its loving,
     obedient friends! Alas, I who dreamed thus, had not myself learned to obey! Untrusting,
     unfaithful obstinacy had set me at the head of that army of innocents! I was myself but a
     slave, like any king in the world I had left who does or would do only what pleases him! But
     Lona rode beside me a child indeed, therefore a free woman—calm, silent, watchful, not a whit
     afraid!
We were nearly in the heart of the city before any of its inhabitants became aware of our
     presence. But now windows began to open, and sleepy heads to look out. Every face wore at first
     a dull stare of wonderless astonishment, which, as soon as the starers perceived the animals,
     changed to one of consternation. In spite of their fear, however, when they saw that their
     invaders were almost all children, the women came running into the streets, and the men
     followed. But for a time all of them kept close to the houses, leaving open the middle of the
     way, for they durst not approach the animals.
At length a boy, who looked about five years old, and was full of the idea of his mother,
     spying in the crowd a woman whose face attracted him, threw himself upon her from his antelope,
     and clung about her neck; nor was she slow to return his embrace and kisses. But the hand of a
     man came over her shoulder, and seized him by the neck. Instantly a girl ran her sharp spear
     into the fellow's arm. He sent forth a savage howl, and immediately stabbed by two or three
     more, fled yelling.
"They are just bad giants!" said Lona, her eyes flashing as she drove her horse against one
     of unusual height who, having stirred up the little manhood in him, stood barring her way with
     a club. He dared not abide the shock, but slunk aside, and the next moment went down, struck by
     several stones. Another huge fellow, avoiding my charger, stepped suddenly, with a speech whose
     rudeness alone was intelligible, between me and the boy who rode behind me. The boy told him to
     address the king; the giant struck his little horse on the head with a hammer, and he fell.
     Before the brute could strike again, however, one of the elephants behind laid him prostrate,
     and trampled on him so that he did not attempt to get up until hundreds of feet had walked over
     him, and the army was gone by.
But at sight of the women what a dismay clouded the face of Lona! Hardly one of them was even
     pleasant to look upon! Were her darlings to find mothers among such as these?
Hardly had we halted in the central square, when two girls rode up in anxious haste, with the
     tidings that two of the boys had been hurried away by some women. We turned at once, and then
     first discovered that the woman we befriended had disappeared with her baby.
But at the same moment we descried a white leopardess come bounding toward us down a narrow
     lane that led from the square to the palace. The Little Ones had not forgotten the fight of the
     two leopardesses in the forest: some of them looked terrified, and their ranks began to waver;
     but they remembered the order I had just given them, and stood fast.
We stopped to see the result; when suddenly a small boy, called Odu, remarkable for his speed
     and courage, who had heard me speak of the goodness of the white leopardess, leaped from the
     back of his bear, which went shambling after him, and ran to meet her. The leopardess, to avoid
     knocking him down, pulled herself up so suddenly that she went rolling over and over: when she
     recovered her feet she found the child on her back. Who could doubt the subjugation of a people
     which saw an urchin of the enemy bestride an animal of which they lived in daily terror?
     Confident of the effect on the whole army, we rode on.
As we stopped at the house to which our guides led us, we heard a scream; I sprang down, and
     thundered at the door. My horse came and pushed me away with his nose, turned about, and had
     begun to batter the door with his heels, when up came little Odu on the leopardess, and at
     sight of her he stood still, trembling. But she too had heard the cry, and forgetting the child
     on her back, threw herself at the door; the boy was dashed against it, and fell senseless.
     Before I could reach him, Lona had him in her arms, and as soon as he came to himself, set him
     on the back of his bear, which had still followed him.
When the leopardess threw herself the third time against the door, it gave way, and she
     darted in. We followed, but she had already vanished. We sprang up a stair, and went all over
     the house, to find no one. Darting down again, we spied a door under the stair, and got into a
     labyrinth of excavations. We had not gone far, however, when we met the leopardess with the
     child we sought across her back.
He told us that the woman he took for his mother threw him into a hole, saying she would give
     him to the leopardess. But the leopardess was a good one, and took him out.
Following in search of the other boy, we got into the next house more easily, but to find,
     alas, that we were too late: one of the savages had just killed the little captive! It consoled
     Lona, however, to learn which he was, for she had been expecting him to grow a bad giant, from
     which worst of fates death had saved him. The leopardess sprang upon his murderer, took him by
     the throat, dragged him into the street, and followed Lona with him, like a cat with a great
     rat in her jaws.
"Let us leave the horrible place," said Lona; "there are no mothers here! This people is not
     worth delivering."
The leopardess dropped her burden, and charged into the crowd, this way and that, wherever it
     was thickest. The slaves cried out and ran, tumbling over each other in heaps.
When we got back to the army, we found it as we had left it, standing in order and ready.
But I was far from easy: the princess gave no sign, and what she might be plotting we did not
     know! Watch and ward must be kept the night through!
The Little Ones were such hardy creatures that they could repose anywhere: we told them to
     lie down with their animals where they were, and sleep till they were called. In one moment
     they were down, and in another lapt in the music of their sleep, a sound as of water over
     grass, or a soft wind among leaves. Their animals slept more lightly, ever on the edge of
     waking. The bigger boys and girls walked softly hither and thither among the dreaming
     multitude. All was still; the whole wicked place appeared at rest.
 
