
chapter xlv
THE JOURNEY HOME
IT had ceased to be dark; we walked in a dim twilight, breathing through the dimness the
     breath of the spring. A wondrous change had passed upon the world—or was it not rather that a
     change more marvellous had taken place in us? Without light enough in the sky or the air to
     reveal anything, every heather-bush, every small shrub, every blade of grass was perfectly
     visible—either by light that went out from it, as fire from the bush Moses saw in the desert,
     or by light that went out of our eyes. Nothing cast a shadow; all things interchanged a little
     light. Every growing thing showed me, by its shape and colour, its indwelling idea—the
     informing thought, that is, which was its being, and sent it out. My bare feet seemed to love
     every plant they trod upon. The world and my being, its life and mine, were one. The microcosm
     and macrocosm were at length atoned, at length in harmony! I lived in everything; everything
     entered and lived in me. To be aware of a thing, was to know its life at once and mine, to know
     whence we came, and where we were at home—was to know that we are all what we are, because
     Another is what he is! Sense after sense, hitherto asleep, awoke in me—sense after sense
     indescribable, because no correspondent words, no likenesses or imaginations exist, wherewith
     to describe them. Full indeed—yet ever expanding, ever making room to receive—was the conscious
     being where things kept entering by so many open doors! When a little breeze brushing a bush of
     heather set its purple bells a ringing, I was myself in the joy of the bells, myself in the joy
     of the breeze to which responded their sweet tin-tinning,
     myself in the joy of the sense, and of the soul that received all the joys together. To
     everything glad I lent the hall of my being wherein to revel. I was a peaceful ocean upon which
     the ground-swell of a living joy was continually lifting new waves; yet was the joy ever the
     same joy, the eternal joy, with tens of thousands of changing forms. Life was a cosmic
     holiday.
Now I knew that life and truth were one; that life mere and pure is in itself bliss; that
     where being is not bliss, it is not life, but life-in-death. Every inspiration of the dark wind
     that blew where it listed, went out a sigh of thanksgiving. At last I was! I lived, and nothing
     could touch my life! My darling walked beside me, and we were on our way home to the
     Father!
So much was ours ere ever the first sun rose upon our freedom: what must not the eternal day
     bring with it!
We came to the fearful hollow where once had wallowed the monsters of the earth: it was
     indeed, as I had beheld it in my dream, a lovely lake. I gazed into its pellucid depths. A
     whirlpool had swept out the soil in which the abortions burrowed, and at the bottom lay visible
     the whole horrid brood: a dim greenish light pervaded the crystalline water, and revealed every
     hideous form beneath it. Coiled in spires, folded in layers, knotted on themselves, or
     "extended long and large," they weltered in motionless heaps—shapes more fantastic in ghoulish,
     blasting dismay, than ever wine-sodden brain of exhausted poet fevered into misbeing. He who
     dived in the swirling Maelstrom saw none to compare with them in horror: tentacular
     convolutions, tumid bulges, glaring orbs of sepian deformity, would have looked to him
     innocence beside such incarnations of hatefulness—every head the wicked flower that, bursting
     from an abominable stalk, perfected its evil significance.
Not one of them moved as we passed. But they were not dead. So long as exist men and women of
     unwholesome mind, that lake will still be peopled with loathsomenesses.
But hark the herald of the sun, the auroral wind, softly trumpeting his approach! The
     master-minister of the human tabernacle is at hand! Heaping before his prow a huge
     ripple-fretted wave of crimson and gold, he rushes aloft, as if new launched from the urging
     hand of his maker into the upper sea—pauses, and looks down on the world. White-raving storm of
     molten metals, he is but a coal from the altar of the Father's never-ending sacrifice to his
     children. See every little flower straighten its stalk, lift up its neck, and with outstretched
     head stand expectant: something more than the sun, greater than the light, is coming, is
     coming—none the less surely coming that it is long upon the road! What matters to-day, or
     to-morrow, or ten thousand years to Life himself, to Love himself! He is coming, is coming, and
     the necks of all humanity are stretched out to see him come! Every morning will they thus
     outstretch themselves, every evening will they droop and wait—until he comes.—Is this but an
     air-drawn vision? When he comes, will he indeed find them watching thus?
It was a glorious resurrection-morning. The night had been spent in preparing it!
The children went gamboling before, and the beasts came after us. Fluttering butterflies,
     darting dragonflies hovered or shot hither and thither about our heads, a cloud of colours and
     flashes, now descending upon us like a snow-storm of rainbow flakes, now rising into the humid
     air like a rolling vapour of embodied odours. It was a summer-day more like itself, that is,
     more ideal, than ever man that had not died found summer-day in any world. I walked on the new
     earth, under the new heaven, and found them the same as the old, save that now they opened
     their minds to me, and I saw into them. Now, the soul of everything I met came out to greet me
     and make friends with me, telling me we came from the same, and meant the same. I was going to
     him, they said, with whom they always were, and whom they always meant; they were, they said,
     lightnings that took shape as they flashed from him to his. The dark rocks drank like sponges
     the rays that showered upon them; the great world soaked up the light, and sent out the living.
     Two joy-fires were Lona and I. Earth breathed heavenward her sweet-savoured smoke; we breathed
     homeward our longing desires. For thanksgiving, our very consciousness was that.
We came to the channels, once so dry and wearyful: they ran and flashed and foamed with
     living water that shouted in its gladness! Far as the eye could see, all was a rushing,
     roaring, dashing river of water made vocal by its rocks.
We did not cross it, but "walked in glory and in joy" up its right bank, until we reached the
     great cataract at the foot of the sandy desert, where, roaring and swirling and dropping sheer,
     the river divided into its two branches. There we climbed the height—and found no desert:
     through grassy plains, between grassy banks, flowed the deep, wide, silent river full to the
     brim. Then first to the Little Ones was revealed the glory of God in the limpid flow of water.
     Instinctively they plunged and swam, and the beasts followed them.
The desert rejoiced and blossomed as the rose. Wide forests had sprung up, their whole
     undergrowth flowering shrubs peopled with song-birds. Every thicket gave birth to a rivulet,
     and every rivulet to its water-song.
The place of the buried hand gave no sign. Beyond and still beyond, the river came in full
     volume from afar. Up and up we went, now along grassy margin, and now through forest of
     gracious trees. The grass grew sweeter and its flowers more lovely and various as we went; the
     trees grew larger, and the wind fuller of messages.
We came at length to a forest whose trees were greater, grander, and more beautiful than any
     we had yet seen. Their live pillars upheaved a thick embowed roof, betwixt whose leaves and
     blossoms hardly a sunbeam filtered. Into the rafters of this aerial vault the children climbed,
     and through them went scrambling and leaping in a land of bloom, shouting to the unseen
     elephants below, and hearing them trumpet their replies. The conversations between them Lona
     understood while I but guessed at them blunderingly. The Little Ones chased the squirrels, and
     the squirrels, frolicking, drew them on—always at length allowing themselves to be caught and
     petted. Often would some bird, lovely in plumage and form, light upon one of them, sing a song
     of what was coming, and fly away. Not one monkey of any sort could they see.
 
