
chapter xxxiv
PREPARATION
VICTORY thus gained, the woman of Bulika began to speak about the city, and talked much of
     its defenceless condition, of the wickedness of its princess, of the cowardice of its
     inhabitants. In a few days the children chattered of nothing but Bulika, although indeed they
     had not the least notion of what a city was. Then first I became aware of the design of the
     woman, although not yet of its motive.
The idea of taking possession of the place, recommended itself greatly to Lona—and to me
     also. The children were now so rapidly developing faculty, that I could see no serious obstacle
     to the success of the enterprise. For the terrible Lilith—woman or leopardess, I knew her one
     vulnerable point, her doom through her daughter, and the influence the ancient prophecy had
     upon the citizens: surely whatever in the enterprise could be called risk, was worth taking!
     Successful,—and who could doubt their success?—must not the Little Ones, from a crowd of
     children, speedily become a youthful people, whose government and influence would be all for
     righteousness? Ruling the wicked with a rod of iron, would they not be the redemption of the
     nation?
At the same time, I have to confess that I was not without views of personal advantage, not
     without ambition in the undertaking. It was just, it seemed to me, that Lona should take her
     seat on the throne that had been her mother's, and natural that she should make of me her
     consort and minister. For me, I would spend my life in her service; and between us, what might
     we not do, with such a core to it as the Little Ones, for the development of a noble state?
I confess also to an altogether foolish dream of opening a commerce in gems between the two
     worlds—happily impossible, for it could have done nothing but harm to both.
Calling to mind the appeal of Adam, I suggested to Lona that to find them water might perhaps
     expedite the growth of the Little Ones. She judged it prudent, however, to leave that alone for
     the present, as we did not know what its first consequences might be; while, in the course of
     time, it would almost certainly subject them to a new necessity.
"They are what they are without it!" she said: "when we have the city, we will search for
     water!"
We began, therefore, and pushed forward our preparations, constantly reviewing the merry
     troops and companies. Lona gave her attention chiefly to the commissariat, while I drilled the
     little soldiers, exercised them in stone-throwing, taught them the use of some other weapons,
     and did all I could to make warriors of them. The main difficulty was to get them to rally to
     their flag the instant the call was sounded. Most of them were armed with slings, some of the
     bigger boys with bows and arrows. The bigger girls carried aloe-spikes, strong as steel and
     sharp as needles, fitted to longish shafts—rather formidable weapons. Their sole duty was the
     charge of such as were too small to fight.
Lona had herself grown a good deal, but did not seem aware of it: she had always been, as she
     still was, the tallest! Her hair was much longer, and she was become almost a woman, but not
     one beauty of childhood had she outgrown. When first we met after our long separation, she laid
     down her infant, put her arms round my neck, and clung to me silent, her face glowing with
     gladness: the child whimpered; she sprang to him, and had him in her bosom instantly. To see
     her with any thoughtless, obstinate, or irritable little one, was to think of a tender
     grandmother. I seemed to have known her for ages—for always—from before time began! I hardly
     remembered my mother, but in my mind's eye she now looked like Lona; and if I imagined sister
     or child, invariably she had the face of Lona! My every imagination flew to her; she was my
     heart's wife! She hardly ever sought me, but was almost always within sound of my voice. What I
     did or thought, I referred constantly to her, and rejoiced to believe that, while doing her
     work in absolute independence, she was most at home by my side. Never for me did she neglect
     the smallest child, and my love only quickened my sense of duty. To love her and to do my duty,
     seemed, not indeed one, but inseparable. She might suggest something I should do; she might ask
     me what she ought to do; but she never seemed to suppose that I, any more than she, would like
     to do, or could care about anything except what must be done. Her love overflowed upon me—not
     in caresses, but in a closeness of recognition which I can compare to nothing but the devotion
     of a divine animal.
I never told her anything about her mother.
The wood was full of birds, the splendour of whose plumage, while it took nothing from their
     song, seemed almost to make up for the lack of flowers—which, apparently, could not grow
     without water. Their glorious feathers being everywhere about in the forest, it came into my
     heart to make from them a garment for Lona. While I gathered, and bound them in overlapping
     rows, she watched me with evident appreciation of my choice and arrangement, never asking what
     I was fashioning, but evidently waiting expectant the result of my work. In a week or two it
     was finished—a long loose mantle, to fasten at the throat and waist, with openings for the
     arms.
I rose and put it on her. She rose, took it off, and laid it at my feet—I imagine from a
     sense of propriety. I put it again on her shoulders, and showed her where to put her arms
     through. She smiled, looked at the feathers a little and stroked them—again took it off and
     laid it down, this time by her side. When she left me, she carried it with her, and I saw no
     more of it for some days. At length she came to me one morning wearing it, and carrying another
     garment which she had fashioned similarly, but of the dried leaves of a tough evergreen. It had
     the strength almost of leather, and the appearance of scale-armour. I put it on at once, and we
     always thereafter wore those garments when on horseback.
For, on the outskirts of the forest, had appeared one day a troop of full-grown horses, with
     which, as they were nowise alarmed at creatures of a shape so different from their own, I had
     soon made friends, and two of the finest I had trained for Lona and myself. Already accustomed
     to ride a small one, her delight was great when first she looked down from the back of an
     animal of the giant kind; and the horse showed himself proud of the burden he bore. We
     exercised them every day until they had such confidence in us as to obey instantly and fear
     nothing; after which we always rode them at parade and on the march.
The undertaking did indeed at times appear to me a foolhardy one, but the confidence of the
     woman of Bulika, real or simulated, always overcame my hesitancy. The princess's magic, she
     insisted, would prove powerless against the children; and as to any force she might muster, our
     animal-allies alone would assure our superiority: she was herself, she said, ready, with a good
     stick, to encounter any two men of Bulika. She confessed to not a little fear of the
     leopardess, but I was myself ready for her. I shrank, however, from carrying all
     the children with us.
"Would it not be better," I said, "that you remained in the forest with your baby and the
     smallest of the Little Ones?"
She answered that she greatly relied on the impression the sight of them would make on the
     women, especially the mothers.
"When they see the darlings," she said, "their hearts will be taken by storm; and I must be
     there encouraging them to make a stand! If there be a remnant of hardihood in the place, it
     will be found among the women!"
"You must not encumber yourself," I said to Lona, "with any of the children; you
     will be wanted everywhere!"
For there were two babies besides the woman's, and even on horseback she had almost always
     one in her arms.
"I do not remember ever being without a child to take care of," she answered; "but when we
     reach the city, it shall be as you wish!"
Her confidence in one who had failed so unworthily, shamed me. But neither had I initiated
     the movement, nor had I any ground for opposing it; I had no choice, but must give it the best
     help I could! For myself, I was ready to live or die with Lona. Her humility as well as her
     trust humbled me, and I gave myself heartily to her purposes.
Our way lying across a grassy plain, there was no need to take food for the horses, or the
     two cows which would accompany us for the infants; but the elephants had to be provided for.
     True, the grass was as good for them as for those other animals, but it was short, and with
     their one-fingered long noses, they could not pick enough for a single meal. We had, therefore,
     set the whole colony to gather grass and make hay, of which the elephants themselves could
     carry a quantity sufficient to last them several days, with the supplement of what we would
     gather fresh every time we halted. For the bears we stored nuts, and for ourselves dried plenty
     of fruits. We had caught and tamed several more of the big horses, and now having loaded them
     and the elephants with these provisions, we were prepared to set out.
Then Lona and I held a general review, and I made them a little speech. I began by telling
     them that I had learned a good deal about them, and knew now where they came from.
"We did not come from anywhere," they cried, interrupting me; "we are here!"
I told them that every one of them had a mother of his own, like the mother of the last baby;
     that I believed they had all been brought from Bulika when they were so small that they could
     not now remember it; that the wicked princess there was so afraid of babies, and so determined
     to destroy them, that their mothers had to carry them away and leave them where she could not
     find them; and that now we were going to Bulika, to find their mothers, and deliver them from
     the bad giantess.
"But I must tell you," I continued, "that there is danger before us, for, as you know, we may
     have to fight hard to take the city."
"We can fight! we are ready!" cried the boys.
"Yes, you can," I returned, "and I know you will: mothers are worth fighting for! Only mind,
     you must all keep together."
"Yes, yes; we'll take care of each other," they answered. "Nobody shall touch one of us but
     his own mother!"
"You must mind, every one, to do immediately what your officers tell you!"
"We will, we will!—Now we're quite ready! Let us go!"
"Another thing you must not forget," I went on: "when you strike, be sure you make it a
     downright swinging blow; when you shoot an arrow, draw it to the head; when you sling a stone,
     sling it strong and straight."
"That we will!" they cried with jubilant, fearless shout.
"Perhaps you will be hurt!"
"We don't mind that!—Do we, boys?"
"Not a bit!"
"Some of you may very possibly be killed!" I said.
"I don't mind being killed!" cried one of the finest of the smaller boys: he
     rode a beautiful little bull, which galloped and jumped like a horse.
"I don't either! I don't either!" came from all sides.
Then Lona, queen and mother and sister of them all, spoke from her big horse by my side: "I
     would give my life," she said, "to have my mother! She might kill me if she liked! I should
     just kiss her and die!"
"Come along, boys!" cried a girl. "We're going to our mothers!"
A pang went through my heart.—But I could not draw back; it would be moral ruin to the Little
     Ones!
 
