
CHAPTER XVI.
THE BIRTHDAY GIFT.
Brightly and placidly, as the course of their own beautiful river, did the days now pass to
      the inmates of Oakwood. Letters came from Edward so frequently, so happily, that hope would
      rest calmly, joyously, even on the thought of him. He never let an opportunity pass, writing
      always to Mrs. Hamilton (which he had scarcely ever done before), and inclosing his letters to
      Ellen open in hers. The tone, the frequency, were so changed from his last, that his family
      now wondered they had been so blind before in not perceiving that his very seeming liveliness
      was unnatural and overstrained.
With Ellen, too, Mrs. Hamilton's anxious care was bringing in fair promise of success—the
      mistaken influences of her childhood, and their increased effect from a morbid imagination,
      produced from constant suffering, appearing, indeed, about to be wholly eradicated. Anxious to
      remove all sad associations connected with the library, Mrs. Hamilton having determined
      herself to superintend Ellen's studies, passed long mornings in that ancient room with her, so
      delightfully, that it became associated only with the noble authors whose works, or extracts
      from whom, she read and reveled in, and which filled her mind with such new thoughts, such
      expansive ideas, such calming and earnest truths, that she felt becoming to herself a new
      being. Lively and thoughtless as Emmeline she could not now indeed become—alike as their
      dispositions naturally were; but she was more quietly, enduringly happy than she had ever
      remembered her self.
There was only one alloy, one sad thought, that would intrude causing a resolution, which
      none suspected; for, open as she had become, she could breathe it to none but Ellis, for she
      alone could assist her, though it required many persuasions and many assurances, that she
      never could be quite happy, unless it was accomplished, which could prevail on her to grant
      it. Ellen knew, felt, more and more each week, that she could not rest till she had labored
      for and obtained, and returned into her aunt's hands the full sum she had so involuntarily
      appropriated. The only means she could adopt demanded such a seemingly interminable period of
      self-denial, patience, and perseverance, that at first as Ellis represented and magnified all
      connected with it, she felt as if, indeed, she could not nerve herself for the task, much as
      she desired to perform it; but prayer enabled her to face the idea, till it lost its most
      painful aspect, and three months after Edward's departure she commenced the undertaking,
      resolved that neither time nor difficulty should deter her from its accomplishment. What her
      plan was, and whether it succeeded, we may not here inform our readers. Should we be permitted
      to resume our History of the Hamilton Family, both will be revealed.
Greatly to Caroline's delight, the following October was fixed for them to leave Oakwood,
      and, after a pleasant tour, to make the long anticipated visit to London. There would then be
      three or four months' quiet for her to have the benefit of masters, before she was introduced,
      and Mrs. Hamilton fondly hoped, that the last year's residence at home, fraught as it had been
      with so much of domestic trial, and displaying so many hopeful and admirable traits in
      Caroline's disposition, would have lessened the danger of the ordeal of admiration and gayety
      which she so dreaded for her child—whether it had or not, a future page will disclose.
To Emmeline this arrangement was a source of extreme regret, individually, in which Ellen
      now quite sympathized. But Emmeline had never forgotten her mother's gentle hint, that too
      great indulgence of regret or sorrow becomes selfishness, and she tried very hard to create
      some anticipation of pleasure, even in London. Ellen would not look to pleasure, but merely
      tried to think about—and so, when called upon, cheerfully to resign that which was now so
      intensely enjoyable—her studies with her aunt—and so benefit by them as to give Miss Harcourt
      no trouble when she was again under her care; as she knew she and Emmeline must be, more than
      they had been yet, when Caroline's introduction, and their residence in London, would take Mr.
      and Mrs. Hamilton so much from domestic pursuits and pleasures, and, even when at home, compel
      them to be so frequently engrossed with a large circle of friends, and all the variety of
      claims on their attention and time, which a season in London includes.
It was again the 7th of June, and Ellen's birthday. Accustomed from the time she became an
      inmate of Oakwood to regard the anniversary of her birth in the same serious light as Mrs.
      Hamilton had taught her cousins—as a day of quiet reflection, as well as of thankfulness and
      joy, as one that, closing and recommencing another year of their individual lives, taught them
      that they were becoming more and more responsible beings—it was not much wonder that Ellen,
      the whole of that day, should seem somewhat less cheerful than usual. She had indeed had many
      sources of thankfulness and joy during the past year, but a heart and mind like hers could not
      recall its principal event without a return of sorrow. Mrs. Hamilton would not notice her now
      unusual sadness until the evening, when perceiving her standing engrossed in thought beside
      one of the widely-opened windows, near which Caroline was watering some lovely flowers on the
      terrace, she gently approached her, and, putting her arm round her, said, fondly—
"You have thought quite seriously and quite long enough for to-day, my dear Ellen; I must
      not have any more such very silent meditations. That there is something to regret in the
      retrospect of the last year, I acknowledge, but you must not let it poison all the sources of
      thankfulness which it brings likewise."
"It was not of my past conduct, I was thinking at this moment, aunt Emmeline—it was—"
"What, love? tell me without reserve."
"That I never, never can return in the smallest degree all I owe to you," replied Ellen,
      with a sudden burst of emotion, most unusual to her controlled and gentle character; "I never
      can do any thing to evince how gratefully, how intensely I feel all the kindness, the goodness
      you have shown me from the first moment you took me to your home—an unhappy, neglected, ailing
      child, and this year more, more than ever. My own poor mother left me in my dangerous illness,
      and what have you not done to give me back not merely physical, but mental health? Day and
      night you watched beside me, forgetting all the care, the misery, my conduct had caused you,
      only thinking, only seeking, to give me back to health and happiness. Oh, aunt Emmeline, your
      very household can evince gratitude and love, in the performance of their respective duties—I
      can do nothing, never can. If I only could."
"Do you remember the fable of the lion and the mouse, my dear Ellen, and Miss Edgeworth's
      still prettier story on the same subject?" replied Mrs. Hamilton, more affected than she chose
      to betray, though she drew her niece closer to her, and kissed her fondly. "I hope I shall
      never be caught in a net, nor exposed to such horrors and danger as poor Madame de Fleury in
      the French Revolution; but for all that, and unlikely as it seems now, my dear child, you may
      have many an opportunity to return all that you so gratefully feel you owe me. Do not let any
      such thought worry you; but believe me, when I assure you that affection and confidence are
      the only return I require, united, as they are in you, with such an earnest desire, and such
      persevering efforts to become all your best friends can wish you."
She was interrupted by the entrance of Emmeline, with a small parcel in her hand.
"Mamma, this has just arrived from Exeter for you; with an apologizing message from Mr.
      Bennet, saying, it should have been here last night, as he promised, but he could not get the
      articles from London in time. I am so very curious as to what it possibly can be, that I would
      bring it to you myself."
"Any other time I would punish your constant curiosity, Emmeline, by refusing to gratify it.
      I can not do so now, however, for I should punish myself as well. I did want it most
      particularly this morning; but I am glad it was not delayed till the day was quite over. Your
      uncle and I did not forget your birthday, my dear Ellen, though it seemed so." And opening the
      parcel as she spoke, a very pretty jewel-case appeared, containing the watch, cross, and all
      the other trinkets Ellen had placed in Mrs. Langford's hand, and never had had the courage to
      inquire for, and the few her aunt had kept for her, but so prettily arranged and beautifully
      burnished, that she would scarcely have known them again.
"Did you never feel any curiosity as to the fate of your trinkets, my love, that you have
      never asked about them?"
"I knew they were in better hands than my own," replied Ellen, with a quivering lip. "I felt
      I had no further right to them, after attempting to part with them."
"I know there are some very painful associations connected with these trinkets, my dear
      Ellen, and, therefore, I would not return them to your own care, till I could add to them a
      birthday-gift," and, lifting the upper tray, she took out a gold chain, and a pair of
      bracelets of chaste and beautiful workmanship—"that the sad memories of the one may be
      forgotten in the pleasant thoughts of the other. I have only one condition to make," she
      added, in an earnest lower tone, as Ellen tried to speak her thanks, but could only cling to
      her aunt's neck and weep. "If ever again you are tempted to dispose of them, dearest, promise
      me to bring them to me, for my valuation first."
"You shall be put into fetters at once, Ellen," said Emmeline joyously, as her cousin gave
      the required promise, so eagerly, that it was evident, she felt how much security dwelt in it.
      "Mamma, make her put them on; I want to see if she looks as interesting as Zenobia did in her
      golden chains."
"I think you might find a prettier simile, Emmeline," replied Mrs. Hamilton, smiling, as she
      granted her request, by throwing the chain round Ellen's neck, and fastening the bracelets on
      her wrists.
"So I can, and so I will," replied the lively girl, altering, without the smallest
      hesitation, the lines to suit her fancy—

 "For thee, rash girl, no suppliant sues;
For thee may vengeance claim her dues;
Who, nurtured underneath our smile,
Repaid our cares with treacherous wile.
Dishonoring thus thy loyal name,
Fetters and warders thou must claim.
The chain of gold was quick unstrung,
Its links on that fair neck were flung;
Then gently drew the glittering band,
And laid the clasp on Ellen's hand."
