
CHAPTER XI.
THE LOSS OF THE SIREN.
From that day, Ellen's recovery, though a sad trial of patience both to the young invalid
      and her affectionate nurses, was surely progressive, without any of those painful relapses
      which had so tried Mr. Maitland's skill before. She no longer shrunk from the society of her
      relations, receiving Caroline's and Miss Harcourt's many kind attentions with surprise indeed,
      for she could not imagine what could so have altered their feelings toward her, but with that
      evident gratitude and pleasure, which encourages a continuance of kindness. Emmeline was
      always kind, but it was indeed happiness to feel she might talk with and share her amusements,
      as in former days; and that, instead of thinking she ought not to receive her aunt's
      affection, the only thing she asked in return was her full confidence. The inexpressible rest
      to poor Ellen which that conversation gave is not to be described. It was so blessed, so
      soothing, that it seemed too unnatural to last, and the secret dread that her uncle would not
      feel toward her and Edward as her aunt did was its only alloy. Edward, too, was cheerful, and
      almost happy when with her; and a long conversation with Mr. Howard, which that worthy man
      insisted upon having as soon as she was strong enough, to remove the false impressions which
      his severity had given, and which never ceased to grieve and reproach him, caused his almost
      daily visits to be anticipated by her with as much gladness as they had before brought
      dread.
"And now that anxiety for Ellen is at end, I must have you take more care of yourself, Mrs.
      Hamilton. Your husband's last injunctions, were, that I should never pass a week without
      calling once or twice at Oakwood to know how all was going on, and what would he say to me if
      he could see you now?"
"He little thought how my strength would be tried, my good friend, and so will quite acquit
      you. I assure you that, physically, I am perfectly well"—(the worthy doctor shook his head
      most unbelievingly)—"but even with one great anxiety calmed, there remains another, which
      every week increases. It is more than double the usual time of hearing from my husband. We
      have never had any answer to the letters detailing Ellen's danger and Edward's return, and the
      answers have been due a full month."
"But the weather has been so unusually tempestuous, it may have been impossible for the
      Siren to ply to and fro from Feroe to Scotland, as Hamilton wished, and no ships are likely to
      touch at those islands in the winter. I really think you need not be anxious on that score;
      none but Arthur Hamilton's head could have contrived your hearing as regularly from such an
      outlandish place as you have done. No news is good news, depend upon it. He may be anxious on
      your account, and returning himself."
"God forbid!" answered Mrs. Hamilton, turning very pale; "better the anxiety of not hearing
      from him than the thought of his being at sea in this season."
Oakwood had resumed its regular happy aspect, though Ellen was still up-stairs. Morris and
      Ellis had once more the happiness of their beloved mistress's superintendence, and proud were
      they both, as if Caroline had been their own child, to show all she had done, and so
      unostentatiously, to save her mother trouble when she had been too anxious to think of any
      thing but Ellen; and the mother's heart swelled with a delicious feeling of gratitude to Him
      who, if in making her so acutely sensible of her solemn responsibility had deepened and
      extended anxiety, had yet in the same measure heightened and spiritualized
      joy. The fruit was indeed worth the nurture, though it might have been often washed
      with tears. Intensely anxious as she felt herself, as did also Mr. Howard and Mr. Maitland,
      and, in fact, all Arthur Hamilton's friends, she yet tried to sustain the spirits of her
      children, for the young men had evidently grown anxious on the subject too. It was not
      unlikely that the seas round Feroe, always stormy, should prevent any ship leaving the island,
      and the young people eagerly grasped the idea: so painful is it to youth to realize a cause
      for anxiety; but even they, at times, grew unconsciously sad and meditating, as the usually
      joyous season of Christmas and New Year passed, and still there was no letter. Ellen and
      Edward both in secret dreaded the arrival of the answer to the latter's confession; but still
      their affection for Mrs. Hamilton was too powerful to permit any thought of self interfering
      with the wish that her anxiety might be calmed.
In January the weather changed; the tremendous winds gave place to an almost unnatural calm,
      and to such excessive mildness and closeness of atmosphere, that it affected the health of
      many who were strong, and not only made Ellen very languid, but frequently recalled those
      dreadful headaches which were in themselves an illness. Business called Mr. Howard to
      Dartmouth near the end of the month, and he prevailed on Edward to accompany him, for whenever
      his sister was more than usually suffering his gloom redoubled. The first few days were so
      fine that the change renovated him; Mr. Howard declared it was the sight of old ocean, and
      Edward did not deny it; for though it was good for the permanence of his repentance and
      resolution to amend, to have the influence of his home sufficiently long, his spirit inwardly
      chafed at his detention, and yearned to be at sea again, and giving proof of his determination
      to become indeed a British sailor.
The third day of their visit, the lull and heaviness of the air increased so strangely and
      closely, for January, as to seem almost portentous. Edward and Mr. Howard lingered on the
      beach; the well-practiced eye of the former tracing in many little things unseen to landsmen,
      the slow, but sure approach of a fearful storm.
"It is strange for the season, but there is certainly electricity in the air," he said,
      directing Mr. Howard's attention to ridges of white-fringed clouds floating under the heavens,
      whose murky hue was becoming denser and denser; and ever and anon, as lashed by some as yet
      silent and invisible blast, the ocean heaved and foamed, and gave sure evidence of approaching
      fury; "there will be, I fear, a terrible storm to-night; and look at those birds" (several
      sea-gulls were skimming along the waves almost bathing their white plumage in the blackened
      waters) "strange how they always herald tempest! Emmeline would call them spirits of the
      blast, reveling in the destruction it foretells!"
"It is approaching already," rejoined Mr. Howard, as a long hollow blast moaned and shivered
      round them, followed by the roar of a mountainous wave bursting on the beach. "God have mercy
      on all exposed to its fury!" and he gladly turned more inland, while Edward remained watching
      its progress with an almost pleasurable feeling of excitement, only wishing he could but be on
      the sea, to enjoy it as such a storm deserved to be.
As the day drew to a close it increased, and as darkness set in, its fury became appalling.
      Blasts, long and loud as the reverberation of artillery, succeeded one another with awful
      rapidity, tearing up huge trees by the roots, and tiles from the roofs. Now and then, at
      distant intervals, blue lightning played through the black heavens, betraying that thunder had
      mingled with the wind, though it was impossible to distinguish the one sound from the other;
      and as the gusts passed onward, streaks of white and spots of strange unnatural blue gleamed
      through the gloom for a moment's space, leaving deeper darkness as they disappeared. The
      ocean, lashed to wildest fury, rolled in huge mountains of troubled waters, throwing up
      showers of snowy foam, contrasting strangely with the darkness of earth and heaven, and
      bursting with a sound that deadened for the time even the wild roar of the blast. To read or
      even to converse, in their comfortable quarters in the hotel, which overlooked the sea, became
      as impossible to Mr. Howard as to Edward. About eleven o'clock, however, the wind suddenly
      veered and lulled, only sending forth now and then a long sobbing wail, as if regretful that
      its work of destruction was even checked; but the sea raged with equal fury, presenting a
      spectacle as magnificent, as awful, and giving no appearance of a calm. A sharp report sounded
      suddenly from the sea—whether it was the first, or that others might have been lost in the
      tumult of the winds and waves, who might answer? Another, and another, at such rapid
      intervals, that the danger was evidently imminent, and Edward started to his feet. Again—and
      he could bear it no longer. Hurriedly exclaiming, "They are signals of distress and close at
      hand! Something must be done; no sailor can sit still, and see sailors perish!" he rushed to
      the beach, closely followed by Mr. Howard, who was resolved on preventing any mad attempt.
      Crowds of fishermen and townsmen had congregated on the beach, drawn by that fearful sound,
      which, by the light from the guns seemed scarcely half a mile distant; and yet so perilous was
      the present appearance of the ocean, that to go to their assistance seemed impossible.
      Suddenly, however, Edward's voice exclaimed, with the glad and eager tone of perfect
      confidence, "They can be saved!—a strong boat and two willing rowers, and I will undertake to
      reach the vessel, and bring the crew safe to shore. Who among you," he continued turning
      eagerly to the group of hardy fishermen, "will be my assistants in this act of common
      humanity? who possesses willing hearts and able hands, and will lend them?"
"No one who cares for his life!" was the sullen answer from one of those he addressed, and
      the rest stood silent, eyeing, half disdainfully half admiringly, the slight figure of the
      young sailor, revealed as it was, in the fitful light of the many torches scattered by the
      various groups along the beach. "It is well for boys to talk, we can not expect old heads on
      young shoulders; but not a boat with my consent leaves the harbor to-night; it would be
      willful murder."
"I tell you I will stake my life on the venture," answered Edward, his passion rising high.
      "Am I speaking to sailors, and can they hesitate when they hear such sounds? Give me but a
      boat, and I will go by myself: and when you need aid, may you find those to give it! you will
      scarce dare ask it, if that vessel perish before your eyes. Lend me a boat, I say, fitted for
      such a sea, and the lender shall be rewarded handsomely. If there be such risk, I ask none to
      share it; my life is my own, and I will peril it."
It would have made a fine scene for a painter, that young, slight form and boyish face,
      surrounded by those weather-beaten men, every countenance expressing some different emotion,
      yet almost all unwilling admiration; the torches' glare, so lurid on the pitchy darkness; the
      sheets of foam, rising and falling like showers of dazzling snow; the craggy background; and,
      out at sea, the unfortunate vessel, a perfect wreck, struggling still with the fast-rising
      waters. Mr. Howard saw all, but with no thought of the picturesque, his mind was far otherwise
      engaged.
"By Neptune! but your honor shall not go alone! I have neither parent, nor sister, nor wife
      to pipe for me, if I go; so my life must be of less moment than yours, and if you can so peril
      it, why should not I?" exclaimed a stalwart young fisherman, advancing, and Edward eagerly
      grasped his rough hand, conjuring him to get his boat at once, there was not a moment to lose;
      but the example was infectious, and an old man hastily stepped forward, declaring the
      youngsters had taught him his duty, and he would do it.
"Great God! what do they say?" exclaimed Edward, as his younger companion hastened down the
      beach to bring his boat to the leeward of the cliff, to launch it more securely, and a rumor
      ran through the crowds, whence arising it was impossible to discover. "The Siren—Captain
      Harvey—my uncle's ship!—and he must be in her—she would never leave Feroe without him. What
      foundation is there for this rumor? let me know, for God's sake!"
But none could tell more than that a vessel, entering the harbor just before the gale, had
      hailed the Siren, about twenty miles distant, and she seemed laboring heavily, and in such a
      distressed state that a very little would finish her. Not a word escaped Edward's lips which
      grew for the moment blanched as marble. Mr. Howard to whom the rumor had brought the most
      intense agony, for not a doubt of its truth would come to relieve him, was at his side,
      grasping his hand, and murmuring, hoarsely—
"Edward, my poor boy, must your life be periled too?—both—both—this is awful!"
"Let me but save him, and if I perish it will be in a good cause. Tell aunt
      Emmeline, I know she will comfort my poor Ellen; and that the boy she has saved from worse
      misery than death, did all he could to save her husband! and if I fail"—he stopped, in strong
      emotion, then added—"give Ellen this, and this," he cut off a lock of his hair with his dirk,
      and placed it and his watch in Mr. Howard's trembling hand.—"And now, my friend, God bless you
      and reward you, too!" He threw himself a moment in Mr. Howard's arms, kissed his cheek, and,
      darting down the beach, leaped into the boat, which was dancing like a nutshell on the water.
      It was several minutes, ere they could succeed in getting her off, the waves seeming
      determined to cast her back; but they were fairly launched at length, and then they heeded not
      that one minute they rode high on a mountain wave, seeming as if nothing could save them from
      being dashed in the abyss below; the next were buried in a deep valley, surrounded by huge
      walls of water, threatening to burst and overwhelm them. For a boat to live in such a sea at
      all seemed miraculous; and old Collins always declared that unless some angel sat at the helm
      with Edward, no human arm could have taken them in safety. If it were an angel, it was the
      pure thought, the faith-winged prayer, that he might be the instrument in the Eternal's hand,
      of turning aside death and misery from that beloved home, in which even his errors had been
      met with love, and conquered by forgiveness.
With every effort, and they were such as to bid the perspiration stream down the face and
      arms of those strong men, and almost exhaust Edward, for he took an oar in turn, it was full
      an hour from their leaving the shore before they reached the ship. She had ceased firing, for
      by the lights on shore they had discovered the boat's departure, and watched her progress by
      the lantern at her head, as only those can watch who feel, one short hour more, and their ship
      will float no longer!
Collins was spokesman, for Edward, as they grappled the boat alongside, had sunk down for
      the moment powerless by the helm; roused, however, effectually by the answer—
"The Siren—bound to Dartmouth—from Feroe—owner Arthur Hamilton, passenger—now on board—nine
      in crew."
"In with you all then—that is Captain Harvey's voice, I'll be sworn; the rumor was only too
      true."
"Ay, old Collins!" returned the captain; "we thought to perish in sight of our own homes;
      now, Mr. Hamilton, not a man will stir till you are safe!"
His companion leaped into the boat without reply, and, sinking on one of the benches, drew
      his cloak closely round his face. Peril was indeed still around him, but compared with
      the—even to that Heaven-directed heart—terrible struggle of beholding death, rising slowly but
      surely round him in the water-filling ship, almost within sight and sound of his home, his
      beloved ones, the mere hope of life seemed almost overpowering. The crew of the
      hapless Siren quickly deserted her. Captain Harvey was the last to descend, and, as he did so,
      a block of iron, loosened from its place, fell cornerwise, and struck sharply on Edward's
      forehead, almost stunning him for the moment, as he watched the captain's descent. He felt the
      blood slowly trickling down his temple and cheek; but he was not one to be daunted by pain: he
      resumed his station at the helm in unbroken silence, only speaking when directions were
      absolutely necessary, and then only in a few brief sailor-terms. They had scarcely proceeded a
      third of their way, when the waters boiled and foamed as tossed by some strange whirlpool, and
      it required all Edward's address and skill as steersman to prevent the frail boat from being
      drawn into the vortex. The cause was soon displayed, and every heart shuddered, for ten
      minutes later, and help would indeed have been in vain. The unfortunate vessel had sunk—been
      swallowed up in those rushing waters; the suction of so large a mass, producing for a brief
      interval the effect of a whirlpool. The silence of awe and of intense thankfulness, fell on
      the heart of every man, and more than all on his, who had so far recovered his first emotion
      as to gaze wonderingly and admiringly on the boyish figure at the helm, whose voice was
      utterly unknown, and whose features the fitful light, and the youth's steadfast gaze on his
      rowers, prevented his tracing with any certainty.
The crowds had increased on the shore, watching with intense eagerness the return of the
      boat; but the expectation was too deep for sound, silence almost portentous reigned. A huge
      sea had concealed her for several minutes, and Mr. Howard, who during these two long hours had
      remained spell-bound on the beach, groaned aloud in his agony; again she was visible, driven
      on with fearful velocity by the tide, nearer, nearer still. He thought he could distinguish
      the figure of his friend: he was sure he could hear the voice of Edward, urging, commanding,
      directing a landing somewhere, in contradiction to the opinion of others. They were within a
      dozen yards of the shore, but still not a sound of gratulation was heard. Every eye was fixed,
      as in the fascination of terror, on a wave in the distance, increasing in size and fury as it
      rapidly approached. It neared the boat—it stood impending over the frail thing as a mighty
      avalanche of waters—it burst; the boat was seen no longer, and a wild and terrible cry sounded
      far and near along the beach!
