
CHAPTER V.
THE CULPRIT AND THE JUDGE.
It was nearly seven when the young party returned, delighted as usual with their afternoon's
      amusement; and Percy, shouting loudly for his mother, giving vent to an exclamation of
      impatience at finding she was still invisible.
"I shall wish Morris and all his concerns at the bottom of the Dart, if he is so to engross
      my mother when I want her," he said, as he flung himself full length on a couch in the
      music-room, desiring Emmeline to make haste and disrobe, as he must have an air on the harp to
      soothe his troubled spirit.
Herbert, to look for a poem, the beauty of which he had been discussing with Miss Harcourt
      during their sail, entered the library, but perceiving his mother, would have retreated,
      thinking her still engaged; but she looked up as the door opened, and perceiving him, smiled,
      and asked him if they had had a pleasant afternoon. He looked at her earnestly, without making
      any reply; then approaching her, took one of her hands in his, and said, fondly—
"Forgive me, dearest mother; I ought not, perhaps, to ask, but I am sure something is wrong.
      You are ill—anxious—may I not share it? Can I do nothing?"
"Nothing, my Herbert; bless you for your watchful love—it is such comfort." And the long
      pressure of the hand which so warmly clasped hers, the involuntary tenderness with which these
      few words were said, betrayed how much she needed such comfort at that moment, but she rallied
      instantly. "Do not look so anxious, dear boy, I am not ill—not quite happy, perhaps, but we
      know where to look for strength to bear trial, Herbert. Wait tea for me till eight o'clock; it
      is probable I may be engaged till then;" and, satisfied that she did not wish to be more
      explicit, Herbert took his book, and somewhat sorrowfully left her.
Ten minutes more, and the massive door unclosed again, but no step advanced, for the
      intruder remained rooted where the door had closed. It was a very large and lofty room, with
      an arched and Gothic roof, of black and fretted oak, the walls and chimney-piece of the same
      material and most elaborate workmanship. A sort of dais, remnant of olden times, divided the
      upper part of the room, by two or three steps, from the lower. On this dais was the raised
      reading-desk of superbly carved oak, at which Mr. Hamilton officiated morning and evening, and
      two library tables of more modern workmanship stood on each side, but rather lower down.
      Except the massive oaken chairs and couches, and three or four curious tables scattered about,
      and the well-filled book-cases, forming, to the height of five feet, the border, as it were,
      of the fretted wood-work of the walls, and filling up the niches formed by the windows; the
      lower part of the hall, two-thirds of the length, was comparatively unoccupied, showing its
      vast space and superb roof to still greater advantage. The magnificently stained windows, one
      on the dais—a deep oriel—threw such subdued light into the room, as accorded well with its
      other appointments; but as evening advanced, gave it that sort of soft, holy light, which
      always impresses the spirit with a species of awe.
We do not think it was that feeling alone which so overpowered the second intruder, as to
      arrest her spell-bound on the threshold. Mrs. Hamilton was seated at one of the tables on the
      dais nearest the oriel window, the light from which fell full on her, giving her figure,
      though she was seated naturally enough in one of the large, maroon velvet, oaken chairs, an
      unusual effect of dignity and command, and impressing the terrified beholder with such a
      sensation of awe, that had her life depended on it, she could not for that one minute have
      gone forward; and even when desired to do so by the words—
"I desired your presence, Ellen, because I wished to speak to you; come here without any
      more delay,"—how she walked the whole length of that interminable room, and stood facing her
      aunt, she never knew.
Mrs. Hamilton for a full minute did not speak, but she fixed that searching look, to which
      we have once before alluded, upon Ellen's face; and then said, in a tone which, though very
      low and calm, expressed as much as that earnest look—
"Ellen! is it necessary for me to tell you why you are here—necessary to produce the proof
      that my words are right, and that you have been influenced by the fearful effects of
      some unconfessed and most heinous sin? Little did I dream its nature."
For a moment Ellen stood as turned to stone, as white and rigid—the next she had sunk down,
      with a wild, bitter cry at Mrs. Hamilton's feet, and buried her face in her hands.
"Is it true—can it be true—that you, offspring of my own sister, dear to me, cherished by me
      as my own child—you have been the guilty one to appropriate, and conceal the appropriation of
      money, which has been a source of distress by its loss, and the suspicion thence proceeding,
      for the last seven weeks?—that you could listen to your uncle's words, absolving his whole
      household as incapable of a deed which was actual theft, and yet, by neither word nor sign,
      betray remorse or guilt?—could behold the innocent suffering, the fearful misery of suspicion,
      loss of character, without the power of clearing himself, and stand calmly, heedlessly by—only
      proving by your hardened and rebellious temper that all was not right within—Ellen, can this
      be true?"
"Yes!" was the reply, but with such a fearful effort, that her slight frame shook as with an
      ague; "thank God, that it is known! I dared not bring down the punishment on myself; but I can
      bear it."
"This is mere mockery, Ellen; how dare I believe even this poor evidence of repentance, with
      the recollection of your past conduct? What were the notes you found?"
Ellen named them.
"Where are they?—This is but one, and the smallest."
Ellen's answer was scarcely audible.
"Used them—and for what?"
There was no answer, neither then, nor when Mrs. Hamilton sternly reiterated the question.
      She then demanded—
"How long have they been in your possession?"
"Five or six weeks;" but the reply was so tremulous, it carried no conviction with it.
"Since Robert told his story to your uncle, or before?"
"Before."
"Then your last answer was a falsehood, Ellen; it is full seven weeks since my husband
      addressed the household on the subject. You could not have so miscounted time, with such a
      deed to date by. Where did you find them?"
Ellen described the spot.
"And what business had you there? You know that neither you nor your cousins are ever
      allowed to go that way to Mrs. Langford's cottage, and more especially alone. If you wanted to
      see her, why did you not go the usual way? And when was this?—you must remember the exact day.
      Your memory is not in general so treacherous."
Again Ellen was silent.
"Have you forgotten it?"
She crouched lower at her aunt's feet, but the answer was audible—
"No."
"Then answer me, Ellen, this moment, and distinctly; for what purpose were you seeking Mrs.
      Langford's cottage by that forbidden path, and when?"
"I wanted money, and I went to ask her to take my trinkets—my watch, if it must be—and
      dispose of them as I had read of others doing, as miserable as I was; and the wind blew the
      notes to my very hand, and I used them. I was mad then—I have been mad since, I believe; but I
      would have returned the whole amount to Robert, if I could but have parted with my trinkets in
      time."
To describe the tone of utter despair, the recklessness as to the effect her words would
      produce, is impossible. Every word increased Mrs. Hamilton's bewilderment and misery. To
      suppose that Ellen did not feel was folly. It was the very depth of wretchedness which was
      crushing her to the earth, but every answered and unanswered question but deepened the
      mystery, and rendered her judge's task more difficult.
"And when was this, Ellen? I will have no more evasion—tell me the exact day."
But she asked in vain. Ellen remained moveless, and silent as the dead.
After several minutes, Mrs. Hamilton removed her hands from her face, and compelling her to
      lift up her head; gazed searchingly on her deathlike countenance for some moments in utter
      silence, and then said, in a tone that Ellen never in her life forgot—
"You can not imagine, Ellen, that this half-confession will either satisfy me, or in the
      smallest degree redeem your sin. One and one only path is open to you; for all that you have
      said and left unsaid but deepens your apparent guilt, and so blackens your conduct, that I can
      scarcely believe I am addressing the child I so loved—and could still so love, if but one real
      sign be given of remorse and penitence—one hope of returning truth. But that sign, that hope,
      can only be a full confession. Terrible as is the guilt of appropriating so large a sum,
      granted it came by the merest chance into your hand; dark as is the additional sin of
      concealment when an innocent person was suffering—something still darker, more terrible, must
      lie concealed behind it, or you would not, could not, continue thus obdurately silent. I can
      believe that under some heavy pressure of misery, some strong excitement, the sum might have
      been used without thought, and that fear might have prevented the confession of any thing so
      dreadful; but what was this heavy necessity for money, this strong excitement? What fearful
      and mysterious difficulties have you been led into to call for either? Tell me the truth,
      Ellen, the whole truth; let me have some hope of saving you and myself the misery of publicly
      declaring you the guilty one, and so proving Robert's innocence. Tell me what difficulty, what
      misery so maddened you, as to demand the disposal of your trinkets. If there be the least
      excuse, the smallest possibility of your obtaining in time forgiveness, I will grant it. I
      will not believe you so utterly fallen. I will do all I can to remove error, and yet to
      prevent suffering; but to win this, I must have a full confession—every question that I put to
      you must be clearly and satisfactorily answered, and so bring back the only comfort to
      yourself, and hope to me. Will you do this, Ellen?"
"Oh, that I could!" was the reply in such bitter anguish, Mrs. Hamilton actually shuddered.
      "But I can not—must not—dare not. Aunt Emmeline, hate me, condemn me to the severest, sharpest
      suffering; I wish for it, pine for it: you can not loathe me more than I do myself, but do
      not—do not speak to me in these kind tones—I can not bear them. It was because I knew what a
      wretch I am, that I have so shunned you, I was not worthy to be with you; oh, sentence me at
      once! I dare not answer as you wish."
"Dare not!" repeated Mrs. Hamilton, more and more bewildered, and, to conceal the emotion
      Ellen's wild words and agonized manner had produced, adopting greater sternness. "You dare
      commit a sin, from which the lowest of my household would shrink in horror, and yet tell me
      you dare not make the only atonement, give me the only proof of real penitence I demand. This
      is a weak and wicked subterfuge, Ellen, and will not pass with me. There can be no reason for
      this fearful obduracy, not even the consciousness of greater guilt, for I promise forgiveness,
      if it be possible, on the sole condition of a full confession. Once more, will you speak? Your
      hardihood will be utterly useless, for you can not hope to conquer me; and if you permit me to
      leave you with your conduct still clothed in this impenetrable mystery, you will compel me to
      adopt measures to subdue that defying spirit, which will expose you and myself to intense
      suffering, but which must force submission at last."
"You can not inflict more than I have endured the last seven weeks," murmured Ellen, almost
      inarticulately. "I have borne that, I can bear the rest."
"Then you will not answer? You are resolved not to tell me the day on which you found that
      money, the use to which it was applied, the reason of your choosing that forbidden path,
      permitting me to believe you guilty of heavier sins than may be the case in reality. Listen to
      me, Ellen; it is more than time this interview should cease, but I will give you one chance
      more. It is now half-past seven,"—she took the watch from her neck, and laid it on the
      table—"I will remain here one half-hour longer: by that time this sinful temper may have
      passed away, and you will consent to give me the confession I demand. I can not believe you so
      altered in two months as to choose obduracy and misery, when pardon, and in time confidence
      and love, are offered in their stead. Get up from that crouching posture, it can be but mock
      humility, and so only aggravates your sin."
Ellen rose slowly and painfully, and seating herself at the table, some distance from her
      aunt, leaned her arms upon it, and buried her face within them. Never before, and never after
      did half an hour appear so interminable to either Mrs. Hamilton or Ellen. It was well for the
      firmness of the former, perhaps, that she could not read the heart of that young girl, even if
      the cause of its anguish had been still concealed. Again and again did the wild longing,
      turning her actually faint and sick with its agony, come over her to reveal the whole, to ask
      but rest and mercy for herself, pardon and security for Edward; but then clear as held before
      her in letters of fire she read every word of her brother's desperate letter, particularly
      "Breathe it to my uncle or aunt, for if she knows it he will, and you will never see me more."
      Her mother, pallid as death, seemed to stand before her, freezing confession on her heart and
      lips, looking at her threateningly, as she had so often seen her, as if the very thought were
      guilt. The rapidly advancing twilight, the large and lonely room, all added to that fearful
      illusion, and if Ellen did succeed in praying, it was with desperate fervor, for strength not
      to betray her brother. If ever there were a martyr spirit, it was enshrined in that young,
      frail form.
But how could Mrs. Hamilton imagine this? How could her wildest fancy bring Edward—the
      brave, happy, eager Edward, of whom captain, officers, and crew wrote in such terms of praise
      and admiration, who had never given cause for anxiety, and who was so far distant—as the
      uniting link to this terrible mystery? Was it not more natural that he should not enter the
      incongruous and painful thoughts floating through her brain, save as her last resource, by his
      influence, to obtain the truth from Ellen? The more she thought, the more agonizing her
      thoughts became; what could induce this determined silence, but a conviction of deeper guilt,
      and what could that guilt be? The most terrible suspicions crossed her mind; she had heard,
      though she had scarcely believed in them, of entanglements, even where the guardianship had
      been most rigid. Could one so young, seemingly so innocent, have fallen into the power of some
      desperate character, who was working on her thus? How could she be sure she intended to take
      her trinkets to Mrs. Langford? Her choosing that forbidden path which was never by any chance
      trodden by the family or their friends, her constant desire lately not to join them in their
      excursions, preferring, and often finding some excuse to remain alone—all came to Mrs.
      Hamilton's mind, with such an overpowering sensation of dread and misery, that the worst guilt
      Ellen could have avowed would scarcely have been worse than anticipation pictured; and yet
      every thought was so vague, every fancy so undefined—there was nothing she could grasp at as a
      saving hope, or in the remotest degree excusing cause; such obdurate silence in one so young,
      generally so yielding, could and must conceal nothing but still more fearful sin. The darkness
      which had gathered round them, save the brightening light of the harvest moon, suddenly
      awakened her to the lapse of time. The moonlight fell full on the face of the watch, which was
      a repeater. It wanted but three minutes more, and Mrs. Hamilton watched the progress of the
      hand with such sickening dread, that when it reached the hour, she had scarcely strength to
      strike it, and so give notice—for words she had none—that the hour of grace had passed. But
      she conquered the powerlessness, and those soft chimes, which, when Ellen first came to
      Oakwood, had been such a constant source of childish wonder and delight, now rang in her ears
      louder, hoarser, more fearfully distinct, than even those of the ancient time-piece in the
      hall, which at the same moment rang out the hour of eight.
The sound ceased, and with heightened dignity, but in perfect silence, Mrs. Hamilton rose,
      passed her niece, and had nearly reached the door, when she paused, and turned toward Ellen,
      as if irresolute. Ellen's eyes had watched her as in fascination, and the pause endowed her
      with just sufficient power to spring forward, fling herself at her aunt's feet, and clasping
      her knees with all her little remaining strength, passionately implore—
"Aunt Emmeline, aunt Emmeline, speak to me but one word, only one word of kindness before
      you go. I do not ask for mercy, there can be none for such a wretch as I am; I will bear
      without one complaint, one murmur, all you may inflict—you can not be too severe. Nothing can
      be such agony as the utter loss of your affection; I thought, the last two months, that I
      feared you so much that it was all fear, no love, but now, now that you know my sin, it has
      all, all come back to make me still more wretched." And before Mrs. Hamilton could prevent, or
      was in the least aware of her intention, Ellen had obtained possession of one of her hands,
      and was covering it with kisses, while her whole frame shook with those convulsed, but
      completely tearless sobs.
"Will you confess, Ellen, if I stay? Will you give me the proof that it is such
      agony to lose my affection, that you do love me as you profess, and that it is only
      one sin which has so changed you? One word, and, tardy as it is, I will listen, and, if I can,
      forgive."
Ellen made no answer, and Mrs. Hamilton's newly-raised hopes vanished; she waited full two
      or three minutes, then gently disengaged her hand and dress from Ellen's still convulsive
      grasp; the door closed, with a sullen, seemingly unwilling sound, and Ellen was alone. She
      remained in the same posture, the same spot, till a vague, cold terror so took possession of
      her, that the room seemed filled with ghostly shapes, and all the articles of furniture
      suddenly transformed to things of life! and springing up, with the wild, fleet step of fear,
      she paused not till she found herself in her own room, where flinging herself on her bed, she
      buried her face on her pillow, to shut out every object—oh, how she longed to shut out
      thought!
It was such a different scene, such a fullness of innocent joy, on which Mrs. Hamilton
      entered, that though she thought herself nerved to control all visible emotion, the contrast
      almost overpowered her; knowing, too, that the fatal effects of one person's sin must banish
      that innocent enjoyment, and would fall on them all as some fearful, joy-destroying blow. The
      room, one of the least spacious, was cheerfully lighted, the urn hissing upon the table, at
      which Caroline, us usual, was presiding, only waiting for her mother's appearance, to satisfy
      Percy, who was loudly declaring he was famished in two senses—for want of his mother's
      company, and of some restorative for his craving appetite. He was lounging on the sofa,
      playing with Emmeline's flowing ringlets, as she sat on a low stool by his side, chatting with
      him, in as discursive a strain as his fancy willed. Herbert and Miss Harcourt were still in
      earnest discussion on their poem, from which Herbert was occasionally reading aloud such
      beautiful passages, and with such richness of intonation, and variety of expression, that
      Caroline, and even Percy and Emmeline, would pause involuntarily to listen.
"At length!" exclaimed Percy, springing up, as did Herbert at the same moment, to get their
      mother a chair, and place her comfortably as usual in the midst of them. "Mother, I really did
      begin to think you intended to punish my impatience by not joining us at all to-night."
"I did not know you were impatient, my dear boy, or perhaps I might have done so!" was her
      quiet, and even smiling reply. "I fear, indeed, waiting for me so long after a
      water-excursion, must have caused you to be impatient in another sense."
"What! that we must be all famished? I assure you, we are, and the loss of your society
      sharpened the pangs of hunger I owe Morris a grudge, and will certainly serve him out one day,
      for detaining you so long when I wanted you."
"It was not Morris that detained me," answered Mrs. Hamilton, somewhat hurriedly. "I had
      done with him by six o'clock; but come, tell me something about your excursion," she added,
      evidently anxious to elude farther remark, and perceiving at once that Miss Harcourt and
      Herbert both looked at her very anxiously. "How did your boat go, and how did Caroline's voice
      and your flute sound on the water, Percy? Herbert, I see, has found poetry, as usual, and made
      Miss Harcourt his companion; you must tell me what verses our beautiful river recalled this
      afternoon; and you, Emmy, have you any more sketches to fill up?"
Her children eagerly entered on their day's enjoyment—Herbert conquering his anxiety, to
      emulate his mother's calmness, but Miss Harcourt had been too painfully startled by the
      unusual expression of forcibly-controlled suffering on her friend's face, to do so with any
      success. Nearly an hour, however, passed animatedly as usual; each found so much to tell, and
      Percy was in such wild spirits, that it was utterly impossible for there to be any thing like
      a pause. Tea had always been a favorite meal at Oakwood, as bringing all the family together
      after the various business of the day, and it continued to be so. They had lingered over it as
      usual, when Caroline suddenly exclaimed—
"What has become of Ellen? I had quite forgotten her till this moment; how neglectful she
      will think us! Do ring the bell, Percy, that we may send and let her know."
"If she has no recollection of meal-time, I really think we need not trouble ourselves about
      her," was Percy's half-jesting, half-earnest reply, for Ellen's changed manner to his mother
      had made him more angry with her, and for a longer time together, than he had ever been with
      any body, especially a woman, in his life. He stretched out his hand, however, to ring the
      bell, but Mrs. Hamilton stopped him.
"You need not, Percy; your cousin will not wish to join us," she said; and her tone was now
      so expressive of almost anguish, that every one of that happy party startled and looked at her
      with the most unfeigned alarm, and Percy, every thought of jest and joyousness checked, threw
      his arms round her, exclaiming—
"Mother dearest! what has happened?—that unhappy girl again! I am sure it is. Why
      do you not cast her off from your heart at once; she will bring you nothing but sorrow for all
      your love."
"Percy, how can you be so harsh?—how unlike you!" exclaimed Emmeline, indignantly, as Mrs.
      Hamilton's head, for a few minutes of natural weakness, sunk on her son's encircling arm. "We
      have all given mamma trouble and pain enough one time or other, and what would have become of
      us if she had cast us off? and Ellen has no mother, too—for shame!"
"Hush!" answered Percy, almost sternly, for there were times when he could quite throw off
      the boy. "This is no light or common matter, to affect my mother thus. Shall we send for Mr.
      Howard, mother?" he continued, fondly; "in my father's absence he is your ablest friend—we can
      only feel, not counsel."
But there are times when feeling can aid in bringing back control and strength, when counsel
      alone would seem so harsh and cold, we can only weep before it; and the fond affection of her
      children, the unusual assumption of protecting manliness in Percy, so touchingly united with
      the deep respect that prevented the least intrusive question as to the cause of her distress
      till she chose to reveal it, gave her power to send back the tears that had escaped at first
      so hot and fast, and though still holding his hand, as if its very pressure was support, she
      was enabled calmly to relate the fatal discovery of that evening. Its effect was, in truth, as
      if a thunderbolt had fallen in the midst of them. An execration, forcibly checked, but
      passionate as his nature, burst from the lips of Percy, as he clamped his arm close round his
      mother, as thus to protect her from the misery he felt himself. Herbert, with a low cry of
      pain, buried his face in his hands. Caroline, shocked and bewildered, but her first thought
      for her mother, could only look at, and feel for her, quite forgetting that her every
      prejudice against Ellen did indeed seem fulfilled. Emmeline at first looked stunned, then
      sinking down at Mrs. Hamilton's feet, hid her face on her lap, and sobbed with such
      uncontrolled violence, that it might have seemed as if she herself, not Ellen, were the guilty
      cause of all this misery. Miss Harcourt, like Caroline, could only think and feel for Mrs.
      Hamilton; for she knew so well all the hope, interest, and love which Ellen had excited, and
      what must be the bitter suffering of this fearful disappointment.
"Do not weep thus, love," Mrs. Hamilton said, addressing Emmeline, after nearly a quarter of
      an hour had passed, and the various emotions of each individual had found vent in words well
      illustrative of their respective characters; all but Emmeline who continued to sob so
      painfully, that her mother successfully forgot her own sorrow to comfort her. "Ellen is still
      very young, and though she is giving us all this misery and disappointment now, she may become
      all we can wish her, by-and-by. We must not give up all hope, because now all my cares seem so
      blighted. There is some fatal mystery attached to her conduct; for I am indeed deceived if she
      is not very wretched and there is some hope in that."
"Then why does she not speak?" rejoined Percy, impetuously; for when he found his mother
      resuming control and firmness, he had given vent to his indignation by striding hastily up and
      down the room. "What but the most determined hardihood and wickedness can keep her silent,
      when you promise forgiveness if she will but speak? What mystery can there, or ought there, to
      be about her, when she has such an indulgent friend as yourself to bring all her troubles to?
      Wretched! I hope she is, for she deserves to be, if it were only for her base
      ingratitude."
"Percy! dear Percy! do not speak and judge so very harshly," interposed Herbert, with deep
      feeling; "there does, indeed, seem no excuse for her conduct, but if we ever should find that
      there is some extenuating cause, how unhappy we shall be for having judged her still more
      harshly than she deserved."
"It is impossible we can do that," muttered Percy, continuing his angry walk. "Nothing but
      guilt can be the cause of her keeping any thing from my mother. Ellen knows, as we all know,
      that even error when confessed, has always been forgiven, sorrow always soothed, and every
      difficulty removed. What can her silence spring from, then, but either defying obstinacy or
      some blacker sin?"
"It does seem like it, unhappily," rejoined Caroline, but very sorrowfully, not at all as if
      she triumphed in her own previous penetration; "but she can not persevere in it long. Dear
      mamma, do not look so distressed: it is impossible she can resist you for any length of
      time."
"She has resisted every offer of kindness, my dear child, and it is the difficulty as to
      what course to pursue, to compel submission and confession, that so grieves and perplexes
      me."
"Let me seek Mr. Howard, dearest mother," answered Herbert; "he is so good, so kind, even in
      his severest judgments, that I really think Ellen will scarcely be able to persevere in her
      mistaken silence, if he speak to her."
Mrs. Hamilton paused for some moments in thought.
"I believe you are right, Herbert. If I must have counsel out of my own family, I can not go
      to a kinder, wiser, or more silent friend. If the fearful shame which I must inflict on Ellen
      to-night of proving Robert's innocence before my whole household, by the denouncement of her
      guilt, have no effect in softening her, I will appeal to him."
"Oh, mamma, must this be—can you not, will you not spare her this?" implored Emmeline,
      clinging to her mother, in passionate entreaty; "it would kill me, I know it would. Do not—do
      not expose her to such shame."
"Do you think it is no suffering to my mother to be called upon to do this, Emmeline, that
      you add to it by this weak interference?" replied Percy, sternly, before his mother could
      reply. "Shame! she has shamed us all enough. There wants little more to add to it."
But Emmeline's blue eyes never moved from her mother's face, and Miss Harcourt, longing to
      spare Mrs. Hamilton the suffering of such a proceeding, tried to persuade her to evade it, but
      she did not succeed.
"One word of confession—one evidence that her sin originated in a momentary temptation, that
      it conceals nothing darker—one real proof of penitence, and God knows how gladly I would have
      spared myself and her; but as it is, Lucy, Emmeline, do not make my duty harder."
Few as those words were, the tone that spoke them was enough. No more was said, and Mrs.
      Hamilton tried, but with very little success, to turn her children's thoughts to other and
      pleasanter things. Time seemed to lag heavily, and yet when the prayer bell sounded, it fell
      on every heart as some fearful knell which must have been struck too soon.
All were assembled in the library, and in their respective places, all but one, and Herbert
      waited her appearance.
"Tell Miss Fortescue that we are only waiting for her to commence prayers;" and Fanny, the
      young ladies' attendant, departed to obey, wondering at Miss Ellen's non-appearance, but
      hearing nothing unusual in her mistress's voice. She returned, but still they waited; again
      the door unclosed, and Emmeline bent forward in an attitude of agony and shame unable even to
      look at her cousin, whose place was close beside her; but the words she dreaded came not
      then—Herbert, at his mother's sign, commenced the service, and it proceeded as usual. The
      fearful struggle in Mrs. Hamilton's gentle bosom, who might read, save the all-pitying God,
      whom she so fervently addressed for strength and guidance? The voice of her son ceased, and
      the struggle was over.
"Before we part for the night," she said, when all but one had arisen, "it is necessary that
      the innocent should be so justified before you all, that he should no longer be injured by
      suspicion and avoidance. It is nearly two months since your master assured you of his own and
      of my perfect conviction that Robert Langford had told the truth, and that the missing notes
      had been unfortunately lost by him; not appropriated, as I fear most of you have believed, and
      are still inclined to do. The complete failure of every search for them has induced a very
      uncomfortable feeling among you all as to the person on whom suspicion of finding and
      appropriating them might fall, none but the household frequenting that particular path, and
      none being able to suppose that the storm could have so dispersed as to lose all trace of
      them. I acknowledge it was unlikely, but not so unlikely as that Robert Langford should have
      failed in honesty, or that any of my household should have appropriated or concealed them. All
      mystery is now, however, at an end; the missing notes have been traced and found; and that all
      suspicion and discomfort may be removed from among you, it becomes my duty to designate the
      individual who has thus transgressed every duty to God and man, not by the sin alone, but by
      so long permitting the innocent to suffer for the guilty, more especially as that individual
      is one of my own family"—for one moment she paused, whether to gain strength, or to give more
      force to her concluding words, no one could tell—"Ellen Fortescue!"
