
CHAPTER IV.
VARIETIES.
A few days more brought Mrs. Greville and Mary to welcome their friends, and Ellen had again
      the pain of being introduced to strangers; but this time it was only the pain of her own
      shyness, for could she have overcome that feeling, she might have felt even pleasure. As it
      was, the gentle voice and manner with which Mrs. Greville addressed her, and the timid yet
      expressive glance of Mary, told of such sympathy and kindness, that she felt attracted toward
      both, and could quite enter into Emmeline's enthusiastic admiration of her friend; not,
      however, believing it possible that she herself could ever be worthy to win Mary's regard.
      Taught from such a very early age to believe herself so far inferior to Edward, such
      characters as Herbert and Mary appeared to her so exalted, that it was quite impossible they
      could ever think of her; the constant little acts of unobtrusive kindness that her cousin
      showed her, she attributed to his extreme goodness, not from the most trifling merit in
      herself. She did indeed love him very dearly, the best next to her aunt; but so much of
      reverence mingled with it, that she was almost more reserved with him than with the others.
      But Herbert was naturally reserved himself in words, and so he did not think any thing about
      it, except to wish and endeavor to make his little cousin happier than she seemed.
When contrasting Mary Greville with Annie Grahame, as she was rather fond of doing, Emmeline
      became so afraid she was disliking the latter more than she ought to do, that she never rested
      till she made an opportunity to confess all her feelings to her mother, and beg her to tell
      her if they were very wrong, and if she ought to like her.
"I am not so unconscionable as to expect you to like every one with whom you associate, my
      dear little girl," replied her mother, fondly, for there was something in Emmeline's guileless
      confidence irresistibly claiming love. "All we have to do when we find nothing that exactly
      sympathizes with our own feelings, or our own ideas of right and wrong, is to try and find out
      some reason for their being so different; some circumstance that may have exposed them to
      greater temptations and trials, for you know I have often told you pleasure and amusements, if
      too much indulged in, are a much greater trial to some than sorrow and pain. Now Annie has had
      a great many more temptations of this kind than you or Mary, and we can not expect one so very
      young entirely to resist them."
"Do you mean, mamma, her going out so much in London?"
"Yes, love; she is very much noticed, and so perhaps thinks a little more of appearance and
      dress and pleasure than is quite necessary."
"But Lady Helen need not take her out so much, if she did not like. Do you think she is
      quite right to do so?" asked Emmeline, very thoughtfully.
"We must never pronounce judgment on other people's actions, my little girl. I think it
      better not to interrupt your present quiet and I hope happy life, and therefore I do not take
      you or Caroline to London; but Mr. Grahame is obliged to be there for several months, and Lady
      Helen very naturally would not like to be separated either from him or her children. And then
      she has such a large family, and Annie so many young relations, that you see Lady Helen could
      not keep her children quite as free from temptation as I do mine, and we should be more sorry
      for Annie than blame her individually, however we may not like her faults. Do you understand
      me, my dear?"
"Oh, yes, mamma, and I am so glad I took courage to tell you all I felt. I am afraid I have
      encouraged many unkind thoughts about her, and I am quite sorry now, for I see she can not
      help them as much as I thought she could. I do not think I could ever make her my friend, but
      I will try very much not to dislike and avoid her."
"And that is all that is required of you, my love. When I tell you that our Father in Heaven
      commands us to love one another, and to avoid all unkindness in thought and deed, I do not
      mean that He desires us to love all alike, because He knew it would be neither for our
      happiness nor good that it should be so, but only to prevent the too great influence of
      prejudice and dislike. We might think such feelings can do no harm, because only confined to
      our own minds, but they would be sure gradually to lead us to taking pleasure in listening to
      their dispraise, and joining in it, and to seeing and talking only of their faults, forgetting
      that if we had been circumstanced exactly as they are, we might have been just the same: and
      this is the feeling David condemns in one of the Psalms we read this morning. Are you tired of
      listening to me, dearest, or shall we read it over again together?"
Emmeline's only answer was to run eagerly for her little Bible, and with glowing cheeks and
      sparkling eyes listen to her mother, as she turned to the fifteenth Psalm, and reading it
      through, particularly pointed out the third verse, and so explained it, as easily and happily
      to satisfy her child as to the Divine authority for all that she had said, and to stamp them
      still more forcibly on her memory.
"And now I do not mean to talk to you any more, my darling," she said, kissing the little
      earnest face upturned to hers. "You have heard quite enough to think about, and I am sure you
      will not forget it, so go and play; Ellen must be wondering what has become of you." And again
      full of glee, the happy child bounded away, exclaiming, as she did so, "Poor Annie, I am glad
      I am not exposed to such temptations, for I am sure I should not be able to resist them
      either."
But though any one who had seen her the next half hour might have fancied that a serious
      thought or sober task could not approach her, neither the conversation nor the Psalm was
      forgotten; with Herbert's explanatory assistance, she not only found the Psalm, but committed
      it to memory; and the second Sunday after her conversation with her mother, repeated it so
      correctly and prettily to her father, as to give her the delight of his caressing approbation.
      Learning correctly by rote was always her greatest trial, for her vivid fancy and very
      versatile powers occasioned her actual lessons to be considered such drudgery, as to require a
      great effort on her part to retain them. The sense, indeed, if she understood it, she learned
      quickly enough; but she preferred her own language to any one's else, and Mrs. Hamilton had
      some difficulty in making her understand that in time of study she required
      correctness, and not fancy; and that the attention which was necessary to conquer the
      words as well as the sense of the lesson, was much more important and valuable, however
      disagreeable it might seem, than the facility of changing the language to something prettier
      than the original.
When, therefore, as in the present case, she voluntarily undertook, and conquered really a
      difficult task for a little lively girl, her parents had no scruple in giving the only reward
      she cared for—their approbation. It was in the bestowal of praise Mrs. Hamilton was compelled
      to be almost painfully guarded. She found that the least expression of unusual approbation
      caused Caroline to relax in her efforts, thinking she had done quite enough, and perniciously
      increasing her already too exalted ideas of herself. While to Emmeline it was the most
      powerful incentive to a continuance in improvement, and determined conquest of her faults.
      There was constantly a dread on the mother's heart, that Caroline would one day accuse her of
      partiality, from the different measure of her approbation which she was compelled to bestow;
      and yet painful as it was to persevere under such an impression, the future welfare of both
      was too precious to be risked for the gratification of the present.
She was watching with delight Emmeline's unrestrained enjoyment of her father's caresses and
      lively conversation, in which Percy as usual joined—for Tiny, as he chose to call her, was his
      especial pet and plaything—when she was startled by a low and evidently suppressed sob near
      her; Ellen was bending over a book of Bible-stories which Herbert had lent her, and her long
      ringlets completely concealed her face; Miss Harcourt and Caroline both looked up surprised,
      but a rapid sign from Mrs. Hamilton prevented their making any remark. Herbert fixed his eyes
      pityingly on his little cousin as if wishing but not liking to address her. Edward was the
      only one of the party who moved. He was busily engaged in examining a large Noah's ark, and
      speculating as to its resemblance to a ship, and its powers of floating, but after a few
      minutes' apparent thought he left it, and sitting down on Ellen's chair, put his arm round
      her, and begged her to find a picture of Noah's ark, and see if it were at all like the toy.
      Cheered by his affection, she conquered with a strong effort the choking in her throat, and
      turned to the page, and tried to sympathize in his wonder if it really were like the vessel in
      which Noah was saved, and where he could have put all the animals. Mrs. Hamilton joined them,
      and without taking more notice of Ellen's very pale cheeks and heavy eyes, than gently to put
      back the thick tresses that seemed to annoy her by their weight, gave them so much interesting
      information on the subject, and so delighted Edward with allowing him to drag down several
      books from the library to find out all they said about it, that two hours slipped away quite
      unconsciously; and Ellen's very painful feeling had been so soothed, that she could smile, and
      join Emmeline in making all the animals walk in grand procession to their temporary
      dwelling.
But Mrs. Hamilton did not forget the child's involuntary evidence of suffering, and vainly
      tried to imagine what at that moment could have caused it. Herbert seemed to think about it,
      too, for the next day she heard him ask Edward—
"If he knew why his sister always looked so sad? if he thought it was because she was not
      yet reconciled to Oakwood?"
"It is not that," was Edward's reply: "she has always looked and seemed sad, as long as I
      can remember her. One reason may be, she was always ill in India, and papa was often telling
      me how very much she suffered, and how patiently she bore it; and then, too, she knew I was
      poor mamma's favorite, (his voice trembled), and that used to make her very unhappy; but I do
      not know why she is so very sad now, unless she is ill again, and that no one can tell, for
      she never will complain."
"Was your sister such a constant sufferer then?" inquired his aunt. "Come here, and tell me
      all you can about her Edward. I wish I could know more about both your lives in India."
Edward, with eager willingness, communicated all he knew, though, from his being so
      constantly with his mother, and Ellen so much left with her father and herself, that all was
      little enough; adding, however, that after her very dangerous illness, when she was eight
      years old, he perfectly well remembered hearing some celebrated physician say to his father
      she would probably feel the effects of it all her life.
"It was a very long time before mamma permitted me to see her," added Edward, "and when I
      did, I remember being almost frightened, she was so altered, so pale, and thin, and weak; and
      then she was very ill after poor papa's death; but since then she has never complained, and
      never kept her bed; but I know she is often in pain, for when I have touched her forehead
      sometimes, it has burnt my hand like fire."
This childish explanation certainly told Mrs. Hamilton more than she had known before; but
      that Ellen had witnessed the fearful scene of her father's death was still concealed. Edward,
      as he grew older, though he did not know why, seemed to shrink from the subject, particularly
      that he had been at a ball the same awful night.
A few days afterward, as Mrs. Hamilton was crossing the large hall on her way to the
      school-room—for so, spite of Percy's determination that it should receive the more learned and
      refined appellation of studio, it was still called—she overheard Caroline's voice, exclaiming
      in angry impatience—
"Indeed, I shall not, I have enough to do with my own lessons, without attending to other
      people's. It is your idleness, Ellen, not the difficulty of your lesson; for I am sure it is
      easy enough."
"For shame, Caroline!" was Emmeline's indignant reply "She is not idle, and I am sure her
      lesson is not so easy; I wish I could explain it properly."
"You know Miss Harcourt herself said she was careless or idle to-day, and she must know. I
      am not going to lose my hour of recreation to help those who won't help themselves."
"How can you be so ill-natured, so unkind!" began Emmeline; but Ellen's beseeching voice
      interrupted her—
"Do not quarrel with your sister on my account, dearest Emmeline; I dare say I am very
      stupid, but my head does feel confused to-day; pray do not mind me, dear Emmy; go with
      Caroline, aunt Emmeline will not like your remaining in."
Caroline had already quitted the room, and in her haste ran against her mother, who she
      instantly perceived had heard all she said. With a deep blush, she turned as to re-enter the
      school-room, but Mrs. Hamilton stopped her—
"No," she said, gravely, "if you are only to act kindly for fear of my reproof, it will do
      no good either to yourself or Ellen. I could scarcely have believed it possible you should so
      have spoken, had I not heard it. Go and amuse yourself as you intended; I rather think had you
      given up a little of your time to help your cousin, you would have experienced more real
      pleasure than you will now feel all day."
"Dear mamma, will you help Ellen?" asked Emmeline, very timidly, for though at
      Ellen's reiterated entreaty she had left her, she felt it almost disrespect to run across the
      hall while her mother was speaking; and the thought suddenly crossed her that, as she was
      quite sure Ellen was not idle though Miss Harcourt thought she was, her mother, by assisting
      her, might save her from increased displeasure.
"Yes, dearest, if necessary; I have heard enough to satisfy me that you would if you could;
      and so I will, for your sake." And Emmeline ran away, quite happy, to try all she could to
      soothe Caroline, whose self-reproach had as usual terminated in a fit of ill-temper and anger
      against Ellen, instead of against herself.
Mrs. Hamilton entered the school-room, and stood by Ellen so quietly that the child did not
      perceive her. Her attention was completely absorbed in her book; but after a few minutes she
      suddenly pushed it from her, and exclaiming almost passionately:
"I can not learn it, try all I can! and Miss Harcourt will be so very, very
      angry"—and she gave way, for the first time since her arrival at Oakwood, to a violent burst
      of tears.
"What is this very, very difficult lesson, my little Ellen!" inquired her aunt,
      kindly taking one hand from her face. "Tell me, and we shall be able to learn it together,
      perhaps."
"Oh, no, no! it is because I am so very stupid; Miss Harcourt has explained it to me twice,
      and I know, I know, I ought to understand it—but—"
"Well, then, never mind it to-day. We can all learn much better some days than others, you
      know; and I dare say to-morrow you will be able to conquer it."
"But Miss Harcourt is already displeased, and she will be still more so, if I leave it
      without her permission," replied the sobbing girl, longing, but not daring, to throw her arms
      round her aunt's neck, and lean her aching head against her bosom.
"Not if I beg a reprieve," replied her aunt, smiling; "but you must not let it make you so
      very unhappy, Ellen. I am afraid it is not only your lesson, but that you are ill, or unhappy
      about something else. Tell me, dearest, what can I do to make you more happy, more at
      home?"
"Oh, nothing, nothing!" replied Ellen, struggling with her tears. "Indeed I am happier than
      I ever thought I could be; I must be very ungrateful to make you think I am unhappy, when you
      are so good and so kind. My head ached to-day, and that always makes me feel a wish to cry;
      but indeed I am not unhappy, and never when you kiss me and call me your Ellen, whatever I may
      feel when you are not by;" and, as if frightened at her own confession, she hid her face in
      her aunt's dress.
Mrs. Hamilton lifted her into her lap, and kissed her without speaking.
"You must learn to love me more and more then, my Ellen," she said, after a pause, "and when
      you are feeling ill or in pain, you must not be afraid to tell me, or I shall think that you
      only fancy you love me."
"Oh, no, it is not fancy; I never loved any one as I do you—except papa—my own darling, good
      papa!" the word was almost choked with sobs. "He used to fondle me and praise me, and call me
      his darling Ellen, as uncle Hamilton did Emmeline last Sunday; and when I was ill, so ill they
      said I should die, he never left me, except when his military duties called him away; and he
      used to nurse me, and try to amuse me, that I might forget pain and weakness. Oh, I shall
      never, never forget that dreadful night!" and she closed her eyes and shuddered, as the horrid
      scene of blood and death flashed before her.
"What dreadful night my poor child?" inquired Mrs. Hamilton, soothingly, after doubting
      whether or not it would be better for Ellen to pursue such an evidently painful theme, and no
      longer requiring an explanation of her emotion the previous Sabbath.
"The night poor papa was killed;—oh, there were so many horrid forms on the grass, the
      natives and poor papa's own men, and they looked so ghastly in the moonlight, and the grass
      was covered with blood and limbs and heads that had been shot off; and there were such cries
      and groans of pain—I see it, I hear it all again so often before I go to sleep, and when my
      head feels as it does to-day, and fancy I hear poor papa's last words and feel his kiss as he
      lay bleeding, bleeding slowly to death and his voice was so strange, and his lips so
      cold!"
"But how came you in such a dreadful scene, my poor Ellen? who could have permitted such a
      little child to be there?"
"Because I wished it so very much; I knew he would die before they could bring him to me,
      and I did so want to feel his kiss and hear his voice once more. Oh, aunt Emmeline! shall I
      never see him again? I know he can not come to me; but shall I, oh, shall I ever be good
      enough to go to him?" And she looked up in her aunt's face with such a countenance of
      beseeching entreaty, that Mrs. Hamilton's eyes filled with tears, and it was a full minute
      before she could speak; but when she did, Ellen felt more relieved and comforted, than on the
      subject of her father's death she had ever felt before. From her mother not being able to bear
      the subject even partially alluded to, and from having no one to whom she could speak of it,
      it had taken a still stronger hold of her imagination; and whenever she was unusually weak,
      and her head aching and confused, it became still more vivid. The very visible sympathy and
      interest of her aunt, and the gentle words in which she tried to turn the child's thoughts
      from that scene of horror to the happiness of her father in Heaven, and an assurance that, if
      she tried to do her duty, and to love and serve God, and trust in His mercy to render her
      efforts acceptable, she would rejoin him, seemed to remove the mass of tangled thought within
      her young mind. Her head, indeed, still ached very painfully, and her eyes seemed as if they
      would close, notwithstanding all her efforts to keep them open; but when she awoke from a long
      quiet sleep, on the sofa in Mrs. Hamilton's dressing-room, where her aunt had laid her, and
      found that kind friend still watching over her, the little heart and temples had ceased to
      throb so quickly, and she felt better and happier.
Mr. Maitland, the medical friend of the family, confirmed the opinion which Edward had said
      their physician in India had given of his sister's state of health. He did not, he said,
      consider her liable to serious illness, or of a constitution that would not endure; but that
      he feared it would be some years before she knew the blessing of really good health, and be
      constantly subject to that lassitude, severe headache, and the depression of the whole system
      thence proceeding, which must prevent the liveliness and quickness of acquirement natural to
      most children. He thought the evil had been very greatly increased by want of sufficient care
      in early years, and the unwholesome climate in which she had so long lived, that he wondered
      her mother had not been advised to send her over to England, adding, with a smile, he was
      quite sure Mrs. Hamilton would not have refused the charge, anxious as it might have been. And
      earnestly, not only on account of the child's physical but mental health, did Mrs. Hamilton
      wish that such had been the case, and that she had had the care of her niece from earliest
      infancy; and how much more would she have wished this, had she known that Mrs. Fortescue had
      really been advised to do with Ellen as Mr. Maitland had said, but that believing it merely an
      idle fancy, and persisting, too, in her own headstrong idea, that it was ill-temper, not
      illness, which rendered Ellen so disagreeable, she would not stoop so to conquer her
      unfortunate pride as to ask such a favor of her relatives, and to whom else could she appeal?
      Colonel Fortescue had none but distant cousins. She did satisfy a qualm of conscience by once
      suggesting to her husband—as her own idea, however, not as that of an experienced
      physician—that as he fancied Ellen was always ill, she might be better in England; but, as she
      expected, not only his intense love for his little girl rose up against the idea of
      separation, but his pride revolted from sending her to claim the pity of relatives who had so
      completely cast off her parents: yet had he been told it was absolutely necessary for her
      health and so greatly for her happiness, he would not have hesitated to sacrifice every
      thought of self. But Eleanor, satisfied that she had done her duty, and delighted that in one
      respect he was quite as proud as she was, never again referred to the subject, and the
      physician who had thus advised, from his constant removals, he never chanced to meet.
Great, indeed, was the amount of childish suffering which this selfish decision, on the part
      of her mother, occasioned Ellen. We do not mean the pain of constant languor itself, though
      that in its full amount our happy healthful young readers can not have the least idea of:
      they, perhaps, think it almost a pleasant change, the care, and petting, and presents so often
      lavished on a brief decided illness: but that is a very different thing to that kind of
      suffering which only so affects them as to be dull and heavy, they do not know why, and to
      make it such a very difficult task to learn the lessons others find so easy; and such a pain
      sometimes to move, that they are thought slow and unwilling, and perhaps even idle, when they
      would gladly run, and help, and work as others; and so weak sometimes, that tears start at the
      first harsh or unkind word, and they are thought cross, when they do not in the least feel so;
      and this, not for a few weeks, but, with few exceptions, the trial of months and even
      years.
And this was Ellen's—which not even the tenderest and most unfailing care of her aunt could
      entirely guard her from. It is a most difficult thing for those who are strong and healthy
      themselves to understand and always bear with physical suffering in others. Miss Harcourt,
      though in general free from any thing like prejudice, and ardently desirous to follow up her
      own and Mrs. Hamilton's ideas of right and wrong, could not so govern her affections as to
      feel the same toward Ellen as she did toward Edward and the children she had lived with and
      taught so long. Her task with Ellen required more patience and forbearance and care than with
      either of the others, and sometimes she could not help believing and acting toward her as if
      it were willful idleness and carelessness, not the languor of disease.
With the recollection and evidence of Herbert, who had been delicate from his birth, and who
      was yet of such a remarkably gifted mind, and so bright in aspect, so sweet in temper, that
      illness seemed to have spiritualized instead of deadened every faculty, she could not
      understand, as Mrs. Hamilton did, the force of circumstances in producing from nearly the same
      cause two much different effects, nor how it was that complete neglect had engendered more
      evils than indiscreet indulgence; but that it appeared to have done so, was unhappily only too
      evident not only to Miss Harcourt but to Mrs. Hamilton. It seemed almost surprising, and
      certainly a proof of a remarkably good disposition, that Edward appeared so free from great
      faults, and of such a warm, generous, frank, and seemingly unselfish nature, so open
      to conviction and to all good impressions, that, except occasional fits of violent passion,
      there really was, as far as his aunt and uncle could perceive, nothing to complain of. They
      did not know that he stood in such awe of Mr. Hamilton, from his mother's lessons of his
      exceeding sternness, that he exercised the greatest control over himself; and he was so
      excessively fond of Mr. Howard, and his days glided by in such varied and delightful
      employment, that there was no temptation to do wrong, except certain acts of trifling
      disobedience, of more consequence from the self-will they betrayed than the acts themselves,
      but which might have been sources of anxiety to his aunt, and lessened her confidence in him
      had she known them; but she did not, for Ellen not only constantly concealed, but she was the
      sufferer for him, and so brought reproof and suspicion on herself, which, could the truth have
      been known, might have been averted. But truth of act as well as word had never been impressed
      on Edward; and, therefore, though he was constitutionally too brave to utter a falsehood, too
      honorable to shield himself at the expense of another, if he knew that other suffered, he had
      been too long taught to believe that Ellen was his inferior, and must always give up to him,
      to imagine that he was even acting deceitfully or unmanfully in permitting her to conceal his
      acts of disobedience.
There was so much to love and admire in Edward, that neither Mr. nor Mrs. Hamilton imagined
      the real weakness of his character—that those lovable qualities all sprung from natural
      impulse, unsustained by any thing like principle. The quickness and apparent fervor with which
      he received the religious impressions they and Mr. Howard sought so earnestly to instill in
      the short time that was allowed them before he entered the navy, they augured so hopefully
      from, that not only his preceptor and uncle, but his ever anxious aunt, looked forward to his
      career with scarcely a doubt as to its probity and honor.
Ellen caused her infinitely more anxiety. There was a disregard to truth, a want of openness
      and candor, which, though Mrs. Hamilton believed the effects of neglect and extreme timidity,
      both her husband and Miss Harcourt feared were natural. Much, indeed, sprung from the poor
      child's mistaken idea of the nature and solemnity of the promise she had made her mother, and
      her constant watchfulness and determination to shield Edward. For the disregard to truth, her
      mother had, indeed, alone been answerable. Ellen's naturally very timid character required the
      inculcation of a high, firm principle, to enable her so to conquer herself as to speak the
      truth, even if she suffered from it. It was only, indeed, in extreme cases of fear—and never
      to her father that she had ever spoken falsely; but to Mrs. Hamilton's high principles, which
      by extreme diligence and care she had so successfully imparted to her own children, even
      concealment was often an acted untruth, and of this fault and equivocation Ellen was but too
      often guilty; exciting Miss Harcourt's and Caroline's prejudices yet more against her. The
      latter, with all her faults, never swerved from the rigid truth, and had a strong contempt and
      dislike toward all those who did—except her friend Annie, who, as she always took care to
      speak the truth to her, she did not suspect of being less careful than herself. Emmeline, who
      had had some difficulty in restraining her love of exaggeration, and also in so conquering her
      own timidity and fear as always to speak the truth, only pitied Ellen, but did not love her
      the less.
Of course, it was not till some months had passed that these lights and shadows of character
      in the orphans, and in the opinions they culled forth in those around them, could be
      discovered; but notwithstanding she stood almost alone in her opinion, notwithstanding there
      was very little outward evidence that she was correct, Mrs. Hamilton believed there was a
      great deal more in her niece than was discernible. She seemed to possess a strength, almost an
      intensity, of feeling and warmth of affection, which, if properly guided, would effectually
      aid in removing the childish errors engendered by neglect; and it was this belief which not
      only enabled her to bear calmly the anxiety and care, and often pain, which those faults and
      their compelled correction occasioned, but actually to love her niece, if possible, still more
      than Edward, and very nearly with the same amount of quiet but intense affection which she
      felt for her own children.
