<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Visits Of Elizabeth, by Elinor Glyn.</title><author>Glyn, Elinor (1864-1943).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
HEAVILAND MANOR
Heaviland Manor,

Wednesday, August 3rd.
Dearest Mamma,—I can't think why you made me come here! Agnès has been so sniffy and
     condescending ever since this morning; but I have remarked that Uncle John's valet is only
     about forty and has a roving eye! so perhaps by to-morrow morning I shan't have my hair screwed
     off my head! But I feel for Agnès, only in a different way.

A Quiet Evening

It is a stuffy, boring place. You remember the house—enormous, tidy, hideous, uncomfortable.
     Well, we had such a dinner last night after I arrived—soup, fish, everything popped on
     to the table for Great-uncle John to carve at one end, and Great-aunt Maria at the other! A
     regular aquarium specimen of turbot sat on its dish opposite him, while Aunt Maria had a huge
     lot of soles. And there wasn't any need, because there were four men-servants in the room who
     could easily have done it at the side; but I remember you said it was always like that when you
     were a little girl. Well, it got on to puddings. I forgot to tell you, though, there were
     plenty of candles on the table, without shades, and a "bouquet" of flowers, all sorts (I am
     sure fixed in sand), in a gold middle thing. Well, about the puddings—at least four of them
     were planted on the table, awfully sweet and jammy, and Uncle John was quite irritated with me
     because I could only eat two; and Aunt Maria, who has got as deaf as a post, kept roaring to
     old Major Orwell, who sat next her, "Children have no healthy appetites as in our day. Eh!
     what?" And I wanted to scream in reply, "But I am grown up now, Aunt Maria!"
Uncle John asked me every question over and over, and old Lady Farrington's false teeth
     jumped so once or twice that I got quite nervous. That is the party, me, Major Orwell, Lady
     Farrington, and Uncle and Aunt.
When dessert was about coming, everything thing got lifted from the table, and
     before you could say "Jack Robinson" off whisked the cloth. I was so unprepared for it that I
     said "Oh!" and ducked my head, and that made the cloth catch on old Lady Farrington's cap—she
     had to sit on my side of the table, to be out of the draught—and, wasn't it dreadful,
     it almost pulled it off, and with it the grey curls fixed at the side, and the rest was all
     bald. So that was why it was so loose—there was nothing to pin it to! And she glared at me, and
     fixed it as straight as she could, but it had such a saucy look all the rest of the
     evening.
I did apologise as well as I could, and there was such an awkward pause; and after dinner we
     had coffee in the drawing-room, and then in a little time tea, and between times they sat down
     to whist, all but Aunt Maria—so they had to have a dummy. She wanted to hear all about you, she
     said, and my going to visit in France; and so I had to bellow descriptions of your neuralgia,
     and about Mme. de Croixmare being my godmother, etc., and Aunt Maria says, "Tut, tut!" as
     well as "Eh! what?" to everything. I had not remembered a bit what they were like; but I was
     only six, wasn't I, when we came last?
After she had asked every sort of thing about you under the sun, she kept giving longing
     glances at the dummy's cards; so I said, "Oh! Aunt Maria, I am afraid I am keeping you from
     your whist." As soon as I could make her hear, you should have seen how she hopped up like a
     two-year-old into the vacant seat; and they were far more serious about it than any one was at
     Nazeby, where they had hundreds on, and Aunt Maria and the others only played for counters—that
     long mother-o'-pearl fish kind. I looked at a book on the table, Lady Blessington's "Book of
     Beauty," and I see then every one got born with champagne-bottle shoulders. Had they been
     paring them for generations before, I wonder? Because old John, the keeper at Hendon, told me
     once that the best fox-terriers arrive now without any tails, their mothers' and grand-mothers'
     and great-grandmothers' having been cut off for so long; but I wonder, if the fashion changed,
     how could they get long tails again? There must be some way, because all of us now have square
     shoulders. But what was I saying? Oh! yes, when I had finished the "Beauty Book," I heard Aunt
     Maria getting so cross with the old boy opposite her. "You've revoked, Major Orwell," she said,
     whatever that means.

An Old English Dinner

Then hot spiced port came in—it was such a close night—and they all had some, and so did I,
     and it was good; and then candles came. Such lovely silver, and so beautifully
     cleaned; and Aunt and Uncle kissed me. I dodged Lady Farrington's false teeth, because, after
     her cap incident, she might have bitten me. And Uncle said, "Too late, too late for a little
     one to sit up—no beauty sleep!" And Aunt Maria said, "Tut, tut!" and I thought it must be the
     middle of the night—it felt like it. But do you know, Mamma, when I got upstairs to my room it
     was only half-past ten!

I have such a huge room, with a four-post feather bed in it. I had let Agnès go to bed
     directly after her supper, with a toothache, so I had to get undressed by myself; and I was
     afraid to climb in from the side, it was so high up. But I found some steps with blue carpet on
     them, as well as a table with a Bible, and a funny old china medicine spoon, and glass and
     water-jug on it; and the steps did nicely, for when I got to the top, I just took a header into
     the feathers. It seemed quite comfy at first, but in a few minutes, goodness gracious, I was
     suffocated! And it was such a business getting the whole mass on the floor; and then I did not
     know very well how to make the bed again, and I had not a very good night, and overslept myself
     in the morning. So I got down late for prayers. Uncle John reads them, and Aunt Maria repeats
     responses whenever she thinks best, as she can't hear a word; but I suppose she counts up, and,
     from long habit, just says "Amen" when she gets to the end of—thirty, say—fancying that will be
     right; and it is generally. Only Uncle John stopped in the middle to say, "Damn that dog!" as
     Fido was whining and scratching outside, so that put her out and brought in the "Amen" too
     soon.

Family Prayers

After breakfast Aunt Maria jingled a large bunch of keys and said it was her day for seeing
     the linen-room, and wouldn't I like to go with her, as all young people should have
     "house-wifely" ideas? So I went. It is so beautifully kept, and such lovely linen, all with
     lavender between it; and she talked to the housekeeper, and looked over everything—she seemed
     to know each sheet by name! Then we went to the storeroom, all as neat as a new pin; and from
     there to interview all the old people from the village, who were waiting with requests, and
     some of them were as deaf as she is. So the housekeeper had to scream at both sides, and I
      was tired when we got back, and did want to rush out of doors; but I had to wait, and
     then walk between Lady Farrington and Aunt Maria up and down the path in the sun till lunch at
     one o'clock; and after that we went for a drive in the barouche, with the fattest white horses
     you ever saw, and a coachman just like Cinderella's one that had been a rat. He seemed to have
     odd bits of fur on his face and under his chin, and Aunt Maria said that he suffered from a
     sore throat, that was why, which he caught at Aunt Mary's wedding; and so I counted up—and as
     Aunt Mary is your eldest sister, it must have been more than twenty years ago. I do call that a
     long sore throat, don't you? and I wouldn't keep a coachman with a beard, would you?
We went at a snail's pace, and got in at four o'clock, and then there was tea at half-past,
     with the nicest bread-and-butter you ever tasted. And after that I said I must write to you,
     and so here I am, and I feel that if it goes on much longer I shall do something dreadful. Now
     good-bye, dearest Mamma.—Your affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.
Heaviland Manor,

Friday, August 5th.
Dearest Mamma,—I am glad to-morrow will soon be here, and that I can come home, but I must
     tell you about yesterday. First, all the morning it rained, and what with roaring at Aunt Maria
     and holding skeins of wool for Lady Farrington, I got such jumps that I felt I should scream
     unless I got out; so after lunch, while they were both having a nap in their chairs, I slipped
     off for a walk by myself—it was still raining, but not much; I took Fido, who is generally a
     little beast, and far too fat.

Lord Valmond Reappears

We had had a nice scamper, and had turned to come back not far from the Park, when who do you
     think came riding up?—Lord Valmond! The last person one expected to see down here! He never
     waited a second when he saw me, but jumped off his horse and beamed—just as if we had parted
     the best of friends!!! Did you ever hear such impudence? Of course I should have
     walked on without recognising him, if I had been left to myself, but he took me so by surprise
     that I had shaken hands before I knew, and then it was too late to walk on. It appears he has a
     place down here which he never comes to generally, but just happened to now—to see how the
     young pheasants were doing. He began at once to talk, as if I had never been angry or boxed his
     ears at all! It really exasperated me, so at last I said he had better get on his horse again,
     as I wanted to run on with Fido; so then he said he had just been on his way to call on Aunt
     Maria, and would come with me.
I said I was sure that wasn't true, as he was going the other way. So he said that he had
     only been going that way to give his horse a little exercise, and that he intended to go in at
     the other gate.
I said I was sure that wasn't true either, as there was no way round that way, unless one
     jumped the park palings. So he said that was what he had intended to do. Just then we came to
     the turnstile of the right-of-way, so I slipped through and called out, "Then I won't keep you
     from your exercise," and walked on as fast as I could.

Lady Farrington's Nap

What do you think he did, Mamma? Simply got on his horse, and jumped those palings there and
     then! I can't think how he wasn't killed. There was almost no take-off, and the fence is so
     high. However, there he was, and I could not get away again, because, if I had run, the horse
     could easily have kept up with me. But I only said "Yes" and "No" all the way to the house, so
     he could not have enjoyed it much. We went straight to the drawing-room, where tea was almost
     up, and there was Lady Farrington alone—still asleep, and her cap had fallen right back, and
     all the bald was showing; and just then a carriage drove up to the door, and we heard visitors
     and the footsteps in the hall. I had just time to cry to Lord Valmond, "Keep them back while I
     wake her!" and then I rushed to Lady Farrington, and shouted in her ear, "Visitors!
     and—and—your cap is a little crooked!" "Eh! what?" she screamed, and her teeth as nearly as
     possible jumped on to the carpet. She simply flew to the mirror, but, as you know, it is away
     so high up she couldn't see, so she made frantic efforts with her hands, and just got it to
     cover the bald, in a rakish, one-sided way, when the whole lot streamed into the room. Lord
     Valmond looked awfully uncomfortable. Goodness knows what he had said to them to keep them
     back! Anyway, Harvey announced "Mrs. and the Misses Clarke," and a thin, very high-nosed
     person, followed by two buffish girls, came forward. Lady Farrington said, "How d'ye do?" as
     well as she could. They were some friends of hers and Aunt Maria's, who are staying with the
     Morverns, I gathered from their conversation. They must have thought she had been on a
     spree since last they met! I could hardly behave for laughing, and did not dare to look at Lord
     Valmond.
They had not been there more than five minutes when another carriage arrived, and two other
     ladies were announced. "The Misses Clark!" The other Clarkes glared like tigers, and Lady
     Farrington lowered her chin and eyelashes at them (she has just the same manners as the people
     at Nazeby, although she is such a frump—it is because she is an earl's daughter, I suppose),
     and she called out to Harvey at the top of her voice, "Let Lady Worden be told at once there
     are visitors." The poor new things looked so uncomfortable, that I felt, as I was Aunt Maria's
     niece, I at least must be polite to them; so I asked them to sit down, and we talked. They were
     jolly, fat, vulgar souls, who have taken the Ortons' place they told me, and this was their
     return visit, as the Ortons had asked Aunt Maria to call. They were quite old maids, past
     thirty, with such funny, grand, best smart Sunday-go-to-meeting looking clothes on.

An Afternoon Call

It appears that Harvey had sent a footman up to Aunt Maria's door, to tell of the first
     Clarkes' arrival, and then, terrified by Lady Farrington's voice, had rushed up himself to
     announce the second lot, and he met Aunt Maria on the stairs coming down, and of course she
     never heard the difference between "Mrs." and the "Misses," and thought he was simply hurrying
     her up for the first set. So in she sailed all smiles, and as Mrs. Clarke was nearest the door,
     she got to her first, and was so glad to see her.
"Dear, dear, years since we met, Honoria," she said; "and these are all your bonny
     girls, tut, tut!" and she looked at the fat Clarks who came next. "Ah! yes I can see! What a
     wonderful likeness to poor dear Arthur!"
Furious glances from Mrs. Clarke, whose daughters are my age!
"And this must be Millicent," she went on, taking the second fat Clark's hand. "Yes, yes;
     why, she takes after you, my dear Honoria, tut, tut!" and she squeezed hands, and beamed at
     them all in the kindest way. Mrs. Clarke, bursting with fury, tried to say they were no
     relations of hers; but, of course, Aunt Maria could not catch all that, only the word
     "relations," and she then caught sight of the buff Clarklets in the background.

A Friendly Invitation

"Ah, yes! I see, these are your girls; I have mistaken your other relations for them." Then
     she turned again to the fat Clarks, evidently liking their jolly faces best. "But one can see
     they are Clarkes. Let me guess. Yes, they must be poor Henry's children!" At this, Lord Valmond
     had such a violent fit of choking by the tea-table, that Aunt Maria, who hears the oddest, most
     unexpected things, caught that, and saw him, and saying, "Howd' ye do?" created a diversion.
     Presently I heard Lady Farrington roaring in a whisper into her ears the difference between the
     Clarkes and the Clarks, and the poor dear was so upset; but her kind heart came up trumps, and
     she was awfully nice to the two vulgar Clarks, who had the good sense to go soon, and then the
     others went. Then she got Lord Valmond on to her sofa, and he screamed such heaps of nice
     things into her ear, just as if she had been Mrs. Smith, and she was so pleased. And
     Uncle John came in, and they talked about the pheasants, and he asked Lord Valmond to dinner on
     Saturday night (to-morrow), and he looked timidly at me, to see if I was still angry with him
     and wanted him not to come, so I smiled sweetly, and he accepted joyfully. Isn't it
     lovely, Mamma? I shall be home with you by then, and Lady Farrington and Major Orwell are going
     too! So he will have to play dummy whist all the evening with Uncle and Aunt, and eat his
     dinner at half-past six! Now, good-night.—Your affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.
</div></body></text></TEI>