<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Visits Of Elizabeth, by Elinor Glyn.</title><author>Glyn, Elinor (1864-1943).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHÂTEAU DE CROIXMARE
Château de Croixmare,

24th August.
Dearest Mamma,—I am quite sure I shall never be able to stand the whole fortnight more here.
     We got back on Monday evening, and Godmamma was as disagreeable as could be. She said all sorts
     of spiteful things about the Tournelles, and especially the Baronne; and Jean looked nervous
     and uncomfortable, and Héloise like a mule; and Victorine said I had no doubt enjoyed myself,
     but for her part she would be sorry to be taken for a "young married woman," which was what
     Madame de Visac (a woman who came to call after we left) had said—"Qui est cette jeune femme
     avec votre belle soeur?"

Modest Maidens

She had seen us embarking. So I said I was flattered, as that seemed to mean in France all
     that was attractive in contrast to the girls. Did you ever hear of such a cat, Mamma?
     and considering that I am only seventeen, and she is an old maid of twenty-two; I think it too
     ridiculous. She need not fear, no one would ever think she was married, she looks like a
     lumping German governess. Two of her girl friends came to breakfast yesterday, of course with
     their mothers, and you should have heard the idiot conversation we had! All plopped down on the
     great sofa in the big salon, like a row of dolls. The two friends were simply gasping with
     excitement at the idea of my having gone on the Sauterelle. They asked me endless
     questions, and giggled, and I did tell them some things!
They asked also about England, and was it really true that when we went to a ball we stayed
     with our danseurs till the next dance? I said I had not been to a ball yet, but had
     always heard that is what one did. One of the friends is quite nice-looking, but with such
     dirty nails. It appears you don't wash much till you are married, it is not considered bien
      vu, in fact rather lancé, and you can't have fine under-clothes, it has all got
     to be as unattractive as possible, and that shows you are as good as gold and will make a nice
     wife.

The Trouville Casino

But it must be a bother picking up a taste for having baths and things afterwards, if it
     isn't from instinct, don't you think so, Mamma? And I am glad I am not French. It is even
     eccentric if you sleep with your window open; Héloise screamed at me for that. They all assure
     me it gives sore eyes, besides encouraging an early grave. I said at last that in England we
     slept the whole summer in the open air. I was so exasperated, and they would believe
     anything.
Oh, I wish we were back on the Sauterelle!—which reminds me I have never told you
     anything about Trouville. The whole place was full of such beautiful ladies, and such nice
     clothes. They must all have been married, their things were so becoming. The Vicomte seemed to
     know them well, and they all spoke of them by their Christian names, such as, Voilà Blanche
      d'Antin! or Emilie something else, as we passed them, but none of our party
     bowed to the really pretty ones, which I thought very queer if they knew them well enough to
     speak of them by their Christian names. I remember you always told me never to do that—I mean
     to use people's first names in speaking of them if you are not acquainted with them—but
     evidently it is different here. The Tournelles and all the others did stop to speak to heaps of
     duller looking people, and every one tried to persuade us to stay and go to the races.
We went to the Casino in the evening and saw a piece; it was boring. We had two boxes, and
     they kept talking to me all the time, so I really could not pay much attention to the
     acting.
Down below us was the Marquise de Vermandoise's brother-in-law, with a rather dowdy little
     woman. They talked a great deal about him, and the Marquise said it was just like his economy
     to go to Trouville with such "une espèce de petite fagottée bon marché." So I suppose it was
     some poor relation he was treating, but they seemed very good friends, as he held her hand all
     the time, quite forgetting the people up above could see. Then we played "Petits Chevaux," and
     I won every time; I do like it very much.

A Bathing Party

We came back to Vinant by the two o'clock train, but first we went to bathe. I was really
     annoyed at having to have a hired dress, a frightful thing, and weighing a ton. The Marquise
     and the others had brought theirs on the chance of our having time for a dip. The Baronne's and
     Héloise's were too sweet. The Baronne's cap had the same kind of lovely little curls round it
     that she wears at night; but she is a great coward, and hardly went in deeper than her ankles,
     in spite of all the entreaties of "Antoine" and the Vicomte. The Marquise de Vermandoise looks
     splendid in the water, just like a goddess, and her bathing-dress was thin enough red silk for
     us to see how beautifully she is made. The splashing about seemed to make her so gay, she kept
     putting her tongue into the gap where her tooth is gone, and looked so wicked they would all
     have swam anywhere after her. She and de Tournelle went out a long way to a boat, and they did
     seem to be having a good time. I wish I could swim like that.
Héloise and "Antoine" made la planche together; it is simply floating, only you have
     some one to hold you up in case you float out too far. The Vicomte wanted to teach me, and as I
     was getting rather tired of pretending to swim with one leg down, I tried, and it feels lovely,
     and we did laugh so over it. At last the Baronne came out quite up to her knees to call to us
     "Trémors, c'est défendu de faire des bêtises." I suppose she thought he would let me drown.
Jean and the Comtesse de Tournelle watched us from the plage. The old Baron swims
     splendidly, and went quite out of sight. Hippolyte was waiting among the other servants with
     our peignoirs, and presently he clapped his hands to insure attention, and shouted,
     "Il ne faut pas que Madame la Baronne reste trop longtemps se mouillant les pieds, elle
     prendrait froid, mieux vaut sortir de l'eau!"

End of the Trip

I am glad my hair curls naturally, because I laughed so at the face of Hippolyte,
     gesticulating at the Baronne, that I did not pay attention to a wave, and it threw me over, and
     I went right under water. The Vicomte pulled me up, but there was no need of him to have been
     so long about it, and I told him so. He apologised, and said it was his fear that I should
     drown, but we were only up to our chests in water, so I don't believe it a bit. After that we
     came out, and it is just as well one has a peignoir to put on immediately, as the
     bathing gowns are so tight and thin, when wet they look quite odd. There were hundreds of other
     people bathing too, and some of the dresses were so pretty. One was all black and very tight,
     with red dragons running over it, and she had a gold bangle on her ankle. I wish we could have
     stayed longer, it was so gay.
In the train coming back we played all sorts of games. Jean and the old Baron went "smoking,"
     and we eight squashed into the same carriage, so as not to be separated. We had to go right up
     to Paris (as the express does not stop at Vinant), and then back again. One can just see the
     high roof of Croixmare from the train. Yesterday those tiresome girls came to
     déjeûner, and to-day we go to pay another visit of ceremony at the Tournelles', to
     thank them for our nice trip. I shall be glad to see them again after looking at Godmamma for
     two whole days.
The evenings are awful. Although it is so warm no one thinks of walking in the garden, or
     even sitting out on the perron. When we come out from dinner, though it is broad
     daylight, every shutter is shut and curtains drawn, and there we sit in the salon, all arranged
     round in a semi-circle, and make conversation, and sirop comes at nine, and, thank
     goodness, we get off to bed at ten! But even if you wanted to talk nicely to the person sitting
     by you you couldn't, because every one would at once stop what they were saying and listen.
     There is going to be an entertainment at the Tournelles' in about a week, a kind of fête
      champêtre. We are to dine in a pavilion in the garden, and then have a
     cotillon.-Good-bye, dear Mamma, with love from your affectionate daughter,
     Elizabeth.
Château de Croixmare,

25th August.

Croixmare again

Dearest Mamma,—The longer I stay, here the more glad I am that I am not French! Victorine is
     going to be shown to her future fiancé to-day, but I must first tell you how it came
     about. We went to Château de Tournelle yesterday to pay our visit, Godmamma, Victorine, and I
     in the victoria, and Jean and Héloise in the phaeton. They were in the garden playing tennis
     with a party of friends from Versailles, and among them, of course, the Vicomte and "Antoine."
     They were all so glad to see me, and the Baronne called me her "chère petite," and
     kissed me on both cheeks, as if we had been parted for months. The Vicomte—when he had done
     putting his heels together and bowing to Victorine and me, and kissing Héloise's and Godmamma's
     hands—managed to get in, in a lower voice, that his ride from Versailles now seemed to him to
     have been very short. Upon which Victorine at once said, "Comment?" with the
     expression of a terrier whose ears are suddenly cocked up on the alert. He bowed more deeply
     than ever, and said that he was saying it was a long ride from Versailles! So you see that
     Frenchmen are not truthful, Mamma! Well—then we were sent to look at the gardens, accompanied
     by Jean and the Curé.

An Untruthful Frenchman

The Comtesse "adores" le tennis, and plays very well, it quite animates her. The
     Baronne plays too, but she doesn't hit the ball much, and screams most of the time; she was in
     the middle of a game when we arrived, and only stopped to pay all kinds of civilities to our
     party. Her pretty feet show when she runs about, but she wears a large black tulle hat with
     fluffy strings, and it does not seem very suitable for tennis. I had to walk with the old Curé
     when the path was not wide enough to trot all together. The gardens really are lovely, with all
     kinds of strange shrubs and trees, and fontaines and bosquets, and nooks, but
     I don't see the least use in them if one has always to walk three in a row, if not more, do
     you, Mamma? The Curé was a charming old fellow, and explained all the plants to me. We had no
     sooner got back to the tennis ground than one felt something momentous was taking place between
     Godmamma and the Baronne. She had finished her tennis, and they were sitting away from the
     others, nodding their heads together. Victorine at once put on a conscious air, and minced more
     than usual. "Antoine" and Héloise seemed speaking seriously, while she examined his new racket.
     The Vicomte had begun a game, so could not talk to us, but some more officers were introduced,
     and, after the usual bowing, we began to talk.
"Vous aimez le tennis, mademoiselle?"
"Oui, monsieur," from Victorine. "Moi, je le déteste," from me.
"Pas possible!" from every one.
"Je vous assure on ne joue que le croquet chez nous."
"Le croquet," from Victorine, "un jeu de Couvent!"
"Le croquet! Et les anglais qui n'aiment que l'exercice!" from the officers, etc.,
     etc.
Very interesting, you see, one's conversations here!

A Marriage Arranged

All this time the Baronne and Godmamma were nodding their heads, and when Jean and Héloise
     joined them, they looked like those sets of mandarins that used to be on Uncle Charles's
     mantelpiece, and as we said Good-bye, the Baronne said to Godmamma, "Bien, chère madame, c'est
     entendu alors c'est pour demain."
All the way home in the carriage, Victorine simpered. I felt I could have slapped her.
In the evening there was an air of mystery about them all, and, quite unlike her usual
     custom, Héloise came into my room to chat when I was going to bed. Of course Agnès stayed as
     long as she could, but no sooner had we got rid of her, than Héloise told me what it was all
     about. It appears the Baronne has a nephew, who has made a heap of debts; he is a Marquis, and
     he wants to "redorer le blason." It is necessary for him to secure a large dot, but he is "si
     terriblement volage," that the extreme plainness of Victorine may put him off. The Baronne has
     been arranging it, and he is to be brought with his parent to breakfast, to sample her!
They have not seen one another yet, and it has been difficult to get him to face the
     situation seriously. Victorine has been dragging on so, that the family will be delighted to
     let her go, even to a less fortune than she has. "Ils devraient être joliment contents, un gros
     paquet comme ça!" as Hippolyte, who knows every one's business, said to the Baronne's
     maid—Héloise told me—and that explains it; she said it would be such a mercy if he
     will settle the affair at once. She had come to ask me a favour. I did wonder what it was! And
     you will laugh, Mamma, when you hear! Victorine is sure to be nervous, Héloise said, and in
     that case her face gets red, and it would be a pity to distract his attention in any way, and
     in short would I mind putting on my most unbecoming dress, and not speaking while the Marquis
     is here?

The Fiancé Appears

So here I am, Mamma, writing to you up in my room, dressed in that horrid beige
     linen that we chose at night, and I shan't go down till déjeûner is ready, pouf! I can
     hear a carriage coming, I must go to the window. Yes, it is the fiancé, accompanied by
     his mother and aunt. He is nice-looking, except that he has got a silly fair beard. I can hear
     them arriving in the hall; such a lot of talking!
Héloise and Victorine have just been here. Héloise even has got an ugly dress on, and
     Victorine has scrubbed her face with soap—I suppose to get that greasy look off—until it shines
     like an apple, her nose is crimson, and her eyes look like two beads. They have gone
     downstairs. More talking—I am sure he is putting his heels together. I'll finish this after
     they have gone, so as to tell you what happens.

Evening.—Such a day! After I had heard mumbling talking for quite a while—the windows
     were all open, and the salon is under me—suddenly the piano began. Victorine plays really well
     generally—that is, she has brilliant execution—but you should have heard the jumble! hardly a
     note right, and in the middle of it up rushed Héloise to me and sank into a chair. It was going
     as badly as it possibly could, she said. Victorine was so nervous that her voice was like a
     file, and her face so crimson that the Marquis must think she has erysipelas! And then, to
     complete matters, when she is told by Godmamma to show her accomplishments, to think that she
     should play like this! Especially as the Marquis is very musical! Héloise said she could see he
     was quite "dégoûté," and the only thing for it now, was for me to change my frock instantly,
     and to put on a becoming one, and to go down and talk. Then he would go away having enjoyed his
     visit, he won't reason why, and will come again; and then when I am gone, he can be pushed into
     the marriage with Victorine!
She rang for Agnès while she spoke, and I was simply pitched into the blue batiste,
     and hustled downstairs.
Such a scene in the salon! The Baronne seated on the large sofa with Jean; Godmamma and the
     mother of the young man in two of the armchairs; while Victorine fumbled with some music on the
     piano with the dame de compagnie, whom Héloise calls "le Remorqueur," because
     she looks like a teeny tug pulling along a coal barge (Victorine). The Marquis was standing up
     by himself—with his hat and gloves in his hand—first on one foot, then on the other; and Marie
     and Yolande were making horrid, shuffling, squeaking noises, sliding on the parquet by
     the window.

Wandering Glances

When I was introduced and had made a reverence to the old ladies, the Marquis was presented,
     and when we had done bowing, he said: "Vous êtes anglaise, mademoiselle?" and, even for that,
     Victorine's eyes shot two yellow flames at me! Héloise nipped my arm to tell me to talk, so of
     course everything went out of my head, and I could only think of "Oui, monsieur." Just then
     breakfast was announced, and we all went in arm-in-arm, Godmamma and the Marquis together. It
     is a huge round table, and I had done the flowers, because they wanted to be shown how we have
     tables in England. I was next but one to the Marquis, with Héloise between. We had scarcely sat
     down, when he began. How beautiful the table looked, and what taste in the flowers! Upon which
     Héloise said, that they were lovely, and were the arrangement of her "chère petite
      belle-soeur!" and she smiled angelically at Victorine, who looked down with conscious
     pride. Then Héloise said that it was a great joy in life to have the absorbing love of flowers
     as Victorine had! and I could not help laughing, because Victorine doesn't know one from
     another, and would not even help me this morning. The Marquis looked and looked at me when I
     laughed, and then lifting his glass of vin ordinaire, he said: "Les belles dents
     rendent gai." Wasn't it nice of him? I think it is hard he should be tied to Victorine. He
     talked to me all the time after that, across Héloise, and considering she told me to be
     agreeable to him, I don't see why she should have been annoyed.
After breakfast—which we left as usual arm-in-arm—we sat in the salon, while the Marquis and
     Jean went back to smoke. It was appalling! If Victorine had been a four-legged cat, she would
     have spit at me, but fortunately the two-legged ones can't spit in drawing-rooms, so I escaped.
     The Baronne, after a good deal of manoeuvring, got by me near the window, and then said in a
     distinct voice, "Ma petite chérie j'ai trop chaud, donnez-moi votre bras un instant;" and so we
     got outside on the terrace, where the huge orange trees in pots stand.

A Lecture on Duty

As soon as we were out of earshot, she began to scold me. Why had I attracted the Marquis?
     how naughty of me, when it was essential his debts should be paid, etc., etc. If she had not
     been so nice, I should have been furious, and you can see, Mamma, how impossible to understand
     them it is; to be told one moment to be nice, and then, when one Is, to be scolded! I just said
     as respectfully as I could, that I had done nothing, and that Héloise had told me to do it, and
     the reason why. That made the Baronne think a little. I am sure she wished for the advice of
     Hippolyte; but the end of it was, that she asked me how much dot you were going to
     allow me! I said I did not know, and that seemed to stump her. At last she said she supposed,
     as we were people of consideration, and that I was the only child, it would be something
     considerable. I do believe, Mamma, she was thinking that I might do for the Marquis! It was
     only a question of having his debts paid—any one who could do that would answer. It did make me
      cross, just as if I would dream of marrying into a nation that eats badly, and
     doesn't have a bath except to be smart. Think of always having to shout across the table, day
     after day, and never to be able to do anything except by rules and regulations; and the stuffy
     rooms and the eight armchairs! I saw myself! and probably ending up with a moustache, or an
      embonpoint, or something like that.
The Baronne at last patted my hand, and said: Well, well, she supposed I had not meant
     anything, but that I must leave the Marquis alone, and turn my attention to "Gaston"
     (the Vicomte), who was really in love with me. Then if I made him sufficiently miserable, he
     would be willing to fall in with another plan of hers, when I was gone, through sheer
      désoeuvrement. So you see, Mamma, they look upon me as a regular catspaw, and I won't
     put up with it. I shall just talk to the Marquis or "Gaston" whenever I like, I was quite
     polite to the Baronne, because she is such a dear; but I am afraid, if Godmamma had said it
     all, I should have been impudent.

An Alternative Plan

By this time the others had joined us on the terrace. They had all been up to fix their hats
     on, because even if you have been out, and are running out again just after, you always have to
     take your hat off, and make a toilette for déjeûner; it does seem waste of
     time. The Baronne is considered quite eccentric because she keeps hers on sometimes. I had not
     even a parasol. Godmamma looked as if she thought it almost indecent. Presently Jean and the
     Marquis came out of the smoking-room and joined us. The Marquis at once began to pay
     compliments about the sun on my hair, and was really so clever in getting in little things,
     while he was talking to Godmamma, that I quite took to him. Victorine had to converse with her
     future belle-mère all the time, and finally the carriage came round, and they
     went.
They were no sooner out of sight, than Godmamma said, with a long rigmarole, that she felt it
     her duty to you to look after me, and she must tell me that it was inconvenant for a
     young girl to smile or speak to a man as much as I had done to the Marquis. I was so furious at
     that, that I said, as I found it impossible to understand their ways, I would ask Agnès to pack
     my things at once, if she would kindly spare a servant to go with a telegram to you, to say I
     was coming home immediately. She was petrified at my answering her! It appears no one else ever
     dares to; and she at once tried to smooth me down, especially when I said I should just like
     time to write and tell the Baronne why I was leaving, as she had been so kind to me. After that
     they all tried to cajole me, except Victorine, who left the room and slammed the door. And so I
     have consented to stay, and here I am finishing my letter to you.—With best love, from your
     affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.
</div></body></text></TEI>