
Chapter II ~ Birdalone Learneth Lore of the Priest. Ten Days of Waiting Wear
Wore that day and the next, and Birdalone fell to talking with her women, whereof were five
      now left; and four of them were young, the eldest scarce of thirty summers, and the fifth was
      a woman of sixty, both wise and kind. All these told her somewhat of their own lives when she
      asked them; and some withal told of folk whom they had known or heard tell of. And well
      pleased was Birdalone to hear thereof, and learn more of the ways of the world, and
      quick-witted she was at the lesson, so that she needed not to ask many questions.
Furthermore, she took to her broidering again, and fell to doing a goodly pair of shoon for
      Atra, since she had worn those borrowed ones somewhat hardly. And the women wondered at her
      needlework, so marvellous fine as it was, and how that in little space of time were come
      flowers and trees, and birds and beasts, all lovely; and they said that the faery must have
      learned her that craft. But she laughed and reddened, and thought of the wood-mother; and,
      sitting there within the four walls, she longed for the oak-glades, and the wood-lawns, and
      for the sight of the beasts that dwelt therein.
Again she fell in with Leonard the priest, and he asked her could she read in a book, and
      when she said nay, he offered to teach her that lore, and she yeasaid that joyously; and
      thenceforth would she have him with her every day a good while; and an apt scholar she was,
      and he no ill master, and she learned her A B C speedily.
Now it was the ninth day since the Champions were gone, and all that time she had not been
      out-a-gates; and after the first two days, had enforced herself to fill up her time with her
      work as aforesaid: but this last day she might do but little, for she could not but take it
      for sure that the morrow would be the day of return; nay, even she deemed that they might come
      in the night-tide; so that when she went to bed, though she was weary, she would wake if she
      might, so that it was nigh dawn ere she fell asleep.
Some three hours after she woke up, and heard a sound of folk stirring in the house, and the
      clashing of weapons; and the heart leapt in her, and she said: They are come, they are come!
      Nevertheless she durst not get out of bed, lest her hope had beguiled her; and she lay awake
      another hour, and no tidings came to her; and then she wept herself to sleep; and when she
      awoke once more, she found that she must have wept sleeping, for the pillow beside her face
      was all wet with the tears.
The sun was high now, and his beams were cast back from the ripple of the lake, and shone
      wavering on the wall of the chamber, the window whereof gave on to the water. Then came a hand
      on the latch of the door, and she started, and her heart grieved her; but it was one of the
      women who opened, and came in, and Birdalone rose up sitting in her bed, and said faintly, for
      she could scarce speak: Is any tiding toward, Catherine? The maid said: Yes, my lady; for
      early after sunrise came weaponed men to the gate, and would sell us beeves; and my lord, Sir
      Aymeris, must needs go forth and chaffer with them, though belike they had been lifting what
      was neither ours, nor theirs, nor the neighbours’. Maybe Sir Aymeris looked to buy tidings
      from them as well as beef. Anyhow they departed when they had gotten their money and drunk a
      cup. And now it is said that the Red Knight hath been hurt in some fray, and keepeth his bed;
      wherefore the land shall have peace of him awhile. Said Birdalone: I thank thee, good
      Catherine; I shall lie a little longer; depart now.
The woman went her ways; and when she was gone, Birdalone wept and sobbed, and writhed upon
      her bed, and found no solace to her grief. But she arose and paced the chamber, and sithence
      looked out of the window over the empty water, and wept again. Then she said: Yet they may
      come ere noon, or it may be ere evening, or perchance tomorrow morning. And she stayed her
      weeping, and was calmer. But still she walked the floor, and whiles looked out of window, and
      whiles she looked on her limbs, and felt the sleekness of her sides, and she said: O my body!
      how thou longest!
But at last she clad herself in haste, and went stealthily from the chamber, as if she
      feared to meet anyone; and she stole up to the tower-top that was nighest, and looked through
      the door on to the leads, and saw no one there; so she went out, and stood by the battlement,
      and gazed long over the water, but saw neither boat nor burning mountain coming towards
      her.
