
CHAPTER XLIII
IF we could always know at the time what we are doing.
Two ladies carried a paper to Whitehall out of charity to a stranger.
Therein the elder was a benefactress to a man she had never spoken of but as “the Wretch;”
     the younger held her truant bridegroom's heart, I may say, in her hand all the road and was his
     protectress. Neither recognised the hand-writing; for no man can write his own hand with a
     toothpick.
They reached Whitehall, and were conducted upstairs to a gentleman of pleasant aspect but
     powerful brow, seated in a wilderness of letters.
He waved his hand, and a clerk set them chairs: he soon after laid down his pen, and leaned
     gravely forward to hear their business. They saw they must waste no time; Julia looked at her
     mother, rose, and took Alfred's missive to his desk, and handed it him with one of her eloquent
     looks, grave and pitiful. He seemed struck by her beauty and her manner.
“It was pinned on my parasol, sir, by a poor prisoner at Drayton House,” said Mrs. Dodd.
“Oh, indeed,” said the gentleman, and began to read the superscription with a cold and wary
     look. But thawed visibly as he read. He opened the missive and ran his eye over it. The perusal
     moved him not a little: a generous flush mounted to his brow; he rang the bell sharply. A clerk
     answered it; the gentleman wrote on a slip of paper, and said earnestly, “Bring me every letter
     that is signed with that name, and all our correspondence about him.”
He then turned to Mrs. Dodd, and put to her a few questions, which drew out the main facts I
     have just related. The papers were now brought in. “Excuse me a moment,” said he, and ran over
     them. “I believe the man is sane,” said he, “and that you will have enabled us to baffle a
     conspiracy, a heartless conspiracy.”
“We do hope he will be set free, sir,” said Mrs. Dodd piteously.
“He shall, madam, if it is as I suspect. I will stay here all night but I will master this
     case; and lay it before the Board myself without delay.”
Julia looked at her mother, and then asked if it would be wrong to inquire “the poor
     gentleman's name?”
“Humph!” said the official; “I ought not to reveal that without his consent. But stay! he
     will owe you much, and it really seems a pity he should not have an opportunity of expressing
     his gratitude. Perhaps you will favour me with your address: and trust to my discretion. Of
     course, if he does not turn out as sane as he seems, I shall never let him know it.”
Mrs. Dodd then gave her address; and she and Julia went home with a glow about the heart
     selfish people, thank Heaven, never know.
Unconsciously these two had dealt their enemy and Alfred's a heavy blow; had set the train to
     a mine. Their friend at the office was a man of another stamp than Alfred had fallen in
     with.
Meantime Alfred was subjected to hourly mortifications and irritations. He guessed the
     motive, and tried to baffle it by calm self-possession: but this was far more difficult than
     heretofore, because his temper was now exacerbated and his fibre irritated by broken sleep (of
     this poor David was a great cause), and his heart inflamed and poisoned by that cruel, that
     corroding passion jealousy.
To think, that while he was in prison, a rival was ever at his Julia's ear, making more and
     more progress in her heart! This corroder was his bitter companion day and night; and perhaps
     of all the maddeners human cunning could have invented this was the worst. It made his temples
     beat and his blood run boiling poison. Indeed, there were times when he was so distempered by
     passion that homicide seemed but an act of justice, and suicide a legitimate relief. For who
     could go on for ever carrying Hell in his bosom up and down a prison yard? He began to go
     alone! to turn impatiently from the petty troubles and fathomless egotism of those afflicted
     persons he had hitherto forced his sore heart to pity. Pale, thin, and wo-begone, he walked the
     weary gravel, like the lost ones in that Hall of Eblis whose hearts were a devouring fire. Even
     an inspector with a naked eye would no longer have distinguished him at first sight from a
     lunatic of the unhappiest class, the melancholiac.

 “Ipse suum cor edens hominum vestigia vitans.” 
Mrs. Archbold looked on and saw this sad sight, not with the pity it would once have caused,
     but with a sort of bitter triumph lightened by no pleasure, and darkened by the shadow of
     coming remorse. Yet up to this time she had shown none of that inconstancy of purpose which
     marks her sex; while she did go far to justify the poet's charge:

 “Nor Hell a fury like a woman scorned.” 
Rooke had a hint to provoke Alfred to violence such as would justify them in subjecting so
     popular a patient to bodily restraint, composing draughts, and other quick maddeners. Rooke
     entered into the game zealously from two motives; he was devoted to Mrs. Archbold, and he hated
     Alfred, who had openly defied him, and mortified his vanity about Frank Beverley.
One Saturday Alfred was ordered out to walk with Rooke and Hayes and Vulcan. He raised no
     objection: suspected, felt homicidal, suppressed the impulse, and by this self-command he got
     time to give that letter to Beverley with instructions.
But, all the walk, he was saying to himself that Julia was in the house, and he was kept away
     from her, and a rival with her; this made him sicken and rage by turns. He came back in a state
     verging on fury.
On entering the yard poor Beverley, who had done his bit of cunning, and by reaction now
     relapsed into extra simplicity, came running, and said, “I've done it; she has got it.”
“What have you done? Who has got what?” cried Rooke.
“Don't tell, Frank.”
“If you don't I'll shake your life out, ye young blackguard,” cried Rooke, seizing him and
     throttling him till he was black in the face.
Alfred's long-pent fury broke out: he gnashed his teeth and dashed his fist in Rooke's
     face.
Rooke staggered back and bellowed with pain and anger, then rushing at him incautiously,
     received a stinger that staggered him, and nearly closed his right eye. He took the hint, and
     put himself in a posture that showed he was skilled in the art of self-defence. He stopped two
     blows neatly, and returned a heavy one upon the ribs. Alfred staggered back some steps, but
     steadied himself, and, as Rooke rushed in too hastily to improve his advantage, caught him
     heavily on the other eye, but lost his own balance a little, which enabled Rooke to close; then
     came a sharp short rally of re-echoing blows, and Rooke, not to be denied, got hold of his man,
     and a wrestling bout ensued, in which Alfred being somewhat weakened by misery and broken rest,
     Rooke's great weight and strength enabled him, after a severe struggle, to fall with his
     antagonist under him, and knock the breath out of his body for the moment. Then Hayes, who had
     stood prudently aloof, came in and helped handcuff him. They could not walk up and down him for
     the Robin, who stood by with a professional air to see fair play.
“Ah, cold iron is your best chance,” he said satirically. “Never you mind, sir: you hit quick
     and well: I'd back you at long odds in the ring: both his peepers are in deep
     mourning.” He added, “A cow can beat a man wrestling.”
When Alfred was handcuffed they turned him loose. It soon transpired, however, that he was
     now a dangerous maniac (Formula) and to be confined in the noisy ward.
On hearing this he saw the trap he had fallen into; saw and trembled. He asked himself what
     on earth he should do; and presently the saying came back to him, “And this is the highest
     stroke of art, to turn evil into good.” He argued thus: Wolf's love of money is my great evil;
     he will destroy me for money, do anything for money. Then suppose I offer him money to be
     honest. He begged an interview with Dr. Wolf on business. This was accorded at once. He asked
     the doctor plump whether he received a large sum to detain him under pretence of insanity.
“Not very, considering the trouble you sometimes give, Mr. Hardie,” was the dry reply.
“Well, then, Justice shall outbid rascality for once. I am a sane man, and you know it; a man
     of my word, and you know it. I'll give you a thousand pounds to let me out of this place.”
Dr. Wolf's eyes sparkled.
“You shall have any bond or security you like; and the money within a week of my
     deliverance.”
Dr. Wolf said he should be delighted to do it, if he could conscientiously.
At this piece of hypocrisy Alfred's cheek reddened, and he could not speak.
“Well, well, I do see a great change in you for the better,” said Dr. Wolf. “If, as I
     suspect, you are convalescent, I will part with you without a thousand pounds or a thousand
     pence.”
Alfred stared. Had he mistaken his man?
“I'll tell you what, though,” said the smooth doctor. “I have got two pictures, one by
     Raphael, one by Correggio.”
“I know them,” said the quick-witted Alfred; “they are worth more than a thousand
     pounds.”
“Of course they are, but I would take a thousand pounds from you.”
“Throw me in my liberty, and I'll make it guineas.”
“We will see about that.” And with this understanding the men of business parted. Dr. Wolf
     consulted Mrs. Archbold then and there.
“Impossible,” said she; “the law would dissolve such a bargain, and you would be exposed and
     ruined.”
“But a thousand pounds!” said the poor doctor.
“Oh, he offered me more than that,” said Mrs. Archbold.
“You don't mean to say so; when was that?”
“Do you remember one Sunday that I walked him out, to keep clear of Mrs. Dodd? Have you not
     observed that I have not repeated the experiment?”
“Yes. But I really don't know why.”
“Will you promise me faithfully not to take any notice if I tell you?”
The doctor promised.
Then she owned to him with manifest reluctance that Alfred had taken advantage of her
     kindness, her indiscretion, in walking alone with him, and made passionate love to her. “He
     offered me not a thousand pounds,” said she, “but his whole fortune, and his heart, if I would
     fly with him from these odious walls; that was his expression.”
Then seeing out of a corner of her eye that the doctor was turning almost green with
     jealousy, this artist proceeded to describe the love scene between her and Alfred, with feigned
     hesitation, yet minute detail. Only she inverted the parts: Alfred in her glowing page made the
     hot love; she listened abashed, confused, and tried all she could think of to bring him to
     better sentiments. She concluded this chapter of history inverted with a sigh, and said, “So
     now he hates me, I believe, poor fellow.”
“Do you regret your refusal?” asked Dr. Wolf uneasily.
“Oh no, my dear friend. Of course, my judgment says that few women at my age and in my
     position would have refused. But we poor women seldom go by our judgments.” And she cast a
     tender look down at the doctor's feet.
In short, she worked on him so, that he left Alfred at her disposition, and was no sooner
     gone to his other asylum six miles off; than the calumniated was conducted by Hayes and Rooke
     through passage after passage, and door after door, to a wing of the building connected with
     the main part only by a covered way. As they neared it, strange noises became audible. Faint at
     first, they got louder and louder. Singing, roaring, howling like wolves. Alfred's flesh began
     to creep. He stopped at the covered way: he would have fought to his last gasp sooner than go
     further, but he was handcuffed. He appealed to the keepers; but he had used them both too
     roughly: they snarled and forced him on, and shut him into a common flagged cell, with a filthy
     truckle-bed in it, and all the vessels of gutta-percha. Here he was surrounded by the desperate
     order of maniacs he at present scarcely knew but by report. Throughout that awful night he
     could never close his eyes for the horrible unearthly sounds that assailed him. Singing,
     swearing, howling like wild beasts! His right-hand neighbour reasoned high of faith and works,
     ending each pious argument with a sudden rhapsody of oaths and never slept a wink. His
     left-hand neighbour alternately sang, and shouted, “Cain was a murderer, Cain was a murderer;”
     and howled like a wolf, making night hideous. His opposite neighbour had an audience, and every
     now and then delivered in a high nasal key, “Let us curse and pray;” varying it sometimes thus:
     “Brethren, let us work double tides.” And then he would deliver a long fervent prayer, and
     follow it up immediately with a torrent of blasphemies so terrific, that coming in such a
     contrast they made Alfred's body wet with perspiration to hear a poor creature so defy his
     Creator. No rest, no peace. When it was still, the place was like the grave; and ever and anon,
     loud, sharp, tremendous, burst a thunderclap of curses, and set those poor demented creatures
     all yelling again for half-an-hour, making the tombs ring. And at clock-like intervals a
     harmless but dirty idiot, who was allowed to roam the ward, came and chanted through the
     keyhole, “Everything is nothing, and nothing is everything.”
This was the only observation he had made for many years.
His ears assailed with horrors, of which you have literally no conception, or shadow of a
     conception, his nose poisoned with ammoniacal vapours, and the peculiar wild-beast smell that
     marks the true maniac, Alfred ran wildly about his cell trying to stop his ears, and trembling
     for his own reason. When the fearful night rolled away, and morning broke, and he could stand
     on his truckle-bed and see the sweet hoar-frost on a square yard of grass level with his prison
     bars, it refreshed his very soul, and affected him almost to tears. He was then, to his
     surprise, taken out, and allowed to have a warm bath and to breakfast with David and the rest;
     but I suspect it was done to watch the effect of the trial he had been submitted to. After
     breakfast, having now no place to go, he lay on a bench, and there exhausted nature overpowered
     him, and he fell fast asleep.
Mrs. Archbold came by on purpose, and saw him. He looked very pale and peaceful. There was a
     cut on his forehead due to Rooke's knuckles. Mrs. Archbold looked down, and the young figure
     and haughty face seemed so unresisting and peaceful sad, she half relented, and shed some
     bitter tears. That did not, however, prevent her setting her female spies to watch him more
     closely than ever.
He awoke cold but refreshed, and found little Beverley standing by him with wet eyes. Alfred
     smiled and held out his hand like a captive monarch to his faithful vassal. “They shan't put
     you in the noisy ward again,” sobbed Frank. “This is your last night here.”
“Hy, Frank, you rascal, my boots!” roared Rooke from an open window.
“Coming, sir—coming!”
Alfred's next visitor was the Robin. He came whispering, “It is all right with Garrett, sir,
     and he has got a key of the back gate; but you must get back to your old room, or we can't
     work.”
“Would to Heaven I could, Robin; another night or two in the noisy ward will drive me mad, I
     think.”
“Well, sir, I'll tell you what you do: which we all have to do it at odd times: hold a candle
     to the devil: here she comes: I think she is everywhere all at one time.” The Robin then
     sauntered away, affecting nonchalance: and Alfred proceeded to hold the candle as directed.
     “Mrs. Archbold,” said he timidly rising from his seat at her approach.
“Sir,” said she haughtily, and affecting surprise.
“I have a favour to ask you, madam. Would you be so kind as to let me go back to my
     room?”
“What, you have found I am not so powerless as you thought!”
“I find myself so weak, and you so powerful that—you can afford to be generous.”
“I have no more power over you than you have over me.”
“I wish it was so.”
“I'll prove it,” said she. “Who has got the key of your room? Hayes?” She whistled, and sent
     for him; and gave him the requisite order before Alfred. Alfred thanked her warmly.
She smiled, and went away disposed to change her tactics, and, having shown him how she could
     torment, try soothing means, and open his heart by gratitude.
But presently looking out of her window she saw the Robin and him together; and somehow they
     seemed to her subtle, observant eyes, to be plotting. The very suspicion was fatal to that
     officer. His discharge was determined on. Meantime she set her spies to watch him, and tell her
     if they saw or heard anything.
Now Mrs. Archbold was going out to tea that evening, and, as soon as ever this transpired,
     the keepers secretly invited the keeperesses to a party in the first-class patients
     drawing-room. This was a rare opportunity, and the Robin and Garrett put their heads together
     accordingly.
In the dusk of the evening the Robin took an opportunity and slipped a new key of the back
     gate into Alfred's hand, and told him “the trick was to be done that very night:” he was to get
     Thompson to go to bed early; and, instead of taking off his clothes, was to wait in readiness.
     “We have been plying Hayes already,” said the Robin, “and, as soon as she is off, we
     shall hocuss him, and get the key; and, while they are all larking in the drawing-room, off you
     go to Merrimashee.”
“Oh, you dear Robin! You have taken my breath away. But how about Vulcan?”
“Oh, we know how to make him amiable: a dog-fancier, a friend of mine, has provided the
     ondeniable where dogs is concerned: whereby Garrett draws the varmint into the scullery, and
     shuts him in, while I get the key from the other. It's all right.”
“Ah, Robin,” said Alfred, “it sounds too good to be true. What? this my last day here!”
The minutes seemed to creep very slowly till eight o'clock came. Then he easily persuaded
     David to go to bed; Hayes went up and unlocked the door for them: it closed with a catch-lock.
     Hayes was drunk, but full of discipline, and insisted on the patients putting out their
     clothes; so Alfred made up a bundle from his portmanteau, and threw it out. Hayes eyed it
     suspiciously, but was afraid to stoop and inspect it closer: for his drunken instinct told him
     he would pitch on his head that moment: so he retired grumbling and dangling his key.
At the end of the corridor he met Mrs. Archbold full dressed, and with a candle in her hand.
     She held the candle up and inspected him; and a little conversation followed that sobered Mr.
     Hayes for a minute or two.
Mrs. Archbold was no sooner gone to her little tea-party than all the first-class ladies and
     gentlemen were sent to bed to get a good sleep for the good of their health, and the keepers
     and keeperesses took their place and romped, and made such a row, sleep was not easy within
     hearing of them. They sat on the piano, they sang songs to a drum accompaniment played on the
     table, they danced, drank, flirted, and enjoyed themselves like schoolboys. Hayes alone was
     gloomy and morose: so the Robin and Garrett consoled him, drank with him, and soothed him with
     the balm of insensibility: in which condition they removed him under charitable pretences, and
     searched his pockets in the passage for the key of Alfred's room.
To their infinite surprise and disappointment it was not upon him.
The fact is, Mrs. Archbold had snatched it from him in her wrath, and put it in her own
     pocket. How far her suspicions went, how much her spies had discovered, I really don't know;
     but somehow or other she was uneasy in her mind, and, seeing Hayes in such a state, she would
     not trust him during her absence, but took the key away with her.
The Robin and Garrett knew nothing of this, and were all abroad, but they thought Rooke must
     have the key; so they proceeded to drink with him, and were just about to administer a really
     effective soporific in his grog, when they and all the merry party were suddenly startled by
     violent ringing at the bell, and thundering and halloaing at the hall door. The men jumped to
     their feet and balanced themselves, and looked half wild, half stupid. The women sat, and began
     to scream: for they had heard a word that has terrors for us all: peculiar terrors for
     them.
This alarm was due to a personage hitherto undervalued in the establishment.
Mr. Francis Beverley had been THINKING. So now, finding all the patients boxed up, and their
     attendants romping in the drawing-room, he lighted seven fires, skilfully on the whole, for
     practice makes perfect; but, singular oversight, he omitted one essential ingredient in the
     fire, and that was the grate.
To be plain, Mr. Francis made seven bonfires of bed-curtains, chairs, and other combustibles
     in the servants' garrets, lighted them contemporaneously, and retired to the basement,
     convinced he had taken the surest means to deliver his friend out of Drayton House: and with a
     certain want of candour that characterises the weak, proceeded to black his other bad master's
     shoes with singular assiduity.
There was no wind to blow the flame; but it was a clear frost; and soon fiery tongues shot
     out of three garret-windows into the night, and lurid gleams burnished four more, and the old
     house was burning merrily overhead, and ringing with hilarity on the first floor.
But the neighbours saw, pointed, wondered, comprehended, shouted, rang, knocked, and surged
     round the iron gate. “Fire! fire! fire!” and “Fire!” went down the road, and men on horseback
     galloped for engines; and the terror-stricken porter opened and the people rushed in and
     hammered at the hall doors, and when Rooke ran down and opened, “Fire!” was the word that met
     him from a score of eager throats and glittering eyes.
“Fire! Where?” he cried.
“Where! Why, you are on fire. Blazing!”
He ran out and looked up at the tongues of flame and volleys of smoke. “Shut the gate,” he
     roared. “Call the police. Fire! fire!” And he dashed back, and calling to the other keepers to
     unlock all the doors they had keys of, ran up to the garrets to see what could be done. He came
     out awe-stricken at what he saw. He descended hastily to the third floor. Now the third floor
     of that wing was occupied principally by servants. In fact, the only patients at that time were
     Dodd and Alfred. Rooke called to the men below to send Hayes up to No. 75 with his key
     directly; he then ran down to the next floor—of which he had keys—and opened all the doors, and
     said to the inmates with a ghastly attempt at cheerfulness, belied by his shaking voice, “Get
     up, gentlemen; there is a ball and supper going on below.” He was afraid to utter the word
     “fire” to them. The other keepers were as rapid, each on his beat, and soon the more rational
     patients took the alarm and were persuaded or driven out half-dressed into the yard, where they
     cowered together in extremity of fear; for the fire began to roar overhead like a lion, and
     lighted up the whole interior red and bright. All was screaming and confusion; and then came a
     struggle to get the incurable out from the basement story. There was no time to handcuff them.
     The keepers trusted to the terror of the scene to cow them, and so opened the doors and got
     them out anyhow. Wild, weird forms, with glaring eyes and matted hair, leaped out and ran into
     the hall, and laughed, and danced, and cursed in the lurid reflection of the fires above. Hell
     seemed discharging demons. Men recoiled from them. And well they did; for now the skylight
     exploded, and the pieces fell tinkling on the marble hall fast as hail. The crowd recoiled and
     ran; but those awful figures continued their gambols. One picked up the burning glass and
     ground it in his hands that bled directly: but he felt neither burn nor cut. The keepers rushed
     in to withdraw them from so dangerous a place: all but one obeyed with sudden tameness: that
     one struggled and yelled like a demon. In the midst of which fearful contest came a sudden
     thundering at a door on the third floor.
“What is that?” cried Rooke.
“It is Mr. Hardie,” screamed the Robin. “You have left him locked in.”
“I told Hayes to let him out long ago.”
“But Hayes hasn't got the key. You've got it.”
“No, no. I tell you Hayes has got it.”
“No, no! Murder! murder! They are dead men. Run for Mrs. Archbold, somebody. Run! Here,
     hammers, hammers! for God's sake, come and help me, break the door. Oh, Rooke, Rooke!”
“As I'm a man Hayes has got the key,” cried Rooke, stamping on the ground, and white with
     terror.
By this time Garrett had got a hammer, and he and Wales rushed wildly up the stairs to batter
     in the strong door if they could. They got to the third floor, but with difficulty; the smoke
     began to blind them and choke them, and fiery showers fell on them, and drove them back
     smarting and choking. Garrett sank down gasping at the stair-foot. Wales ran into the yard
     uttering pitiful cries, and pointing wildly upwards; but before he got there, a hand had broken
     through the glass of a window up in the third floor, the poor white hand of a perishing
     prisoner, and clutched the framework and tore at it.
At this hand a thousand white faces were now upturned amid groans of pity and terror, such as
     only multitudes can utter. Suddenly those anxious faces and glistening eyes turned like one,
     for an attempt, wild and unintelligible, but still an attempt, was about to be made to save
     that hand and its owner out of the very jaws of death.
Now amongst the spectators was one whose life and reason were at stake on that attempt.
Mrs. Dodd was hurrying homeward from this very neighbourhood when the fire broke out. Her son
     Edward was coming at nine o'clock to tea, and, better still, to sleep. He was leaving the fire
     brigade. It had disappointed him; he found the fire-escape men saved the lives, the firemen
     only the property. He had gone into the business earnestly too; he had invented a thing like a
     treble pouch hook, which could be fastened in a moment to the end of a rope, and thrown into
     the window, and would cling to the bare wall, if there was nothing better, and enable him to go
     up and bring life down. But he had never got a chance to try it; and, per contra, he
     was on the engine when they went tearing over a woman and broke her arm and collar-bone in the
     Blackfriars Road; and also when they went tearing over their own fire-dog, and crippled him.
     All this seemed out of character, and shocked Edward; and then his mother could not get over
     the jacket.
In a quarter of an hour he was to take off the obnoxious jacket for ever, and was now
     lounging at the station smoking a short pipe, when a man galloped up crying “Fire!”
“All right!” said Edward, giving a whiff. “Where?”
“Lunatic Asylum. Drayton House.”
Guess how long before the horses were to, and the engine tearing at a gallop down the road,
     and the firemen shouting “Fire! fire!” to clear the way, and Edward's voice the loudest.
When the report of fire swept townward past Mrs. Dodd, she turned, and saw the glow.
“Oh dear,” said she, “that must be somewhere near Drayton House.” And full of the tender
     fears that fill such bosoms as hers for those they love, she could not go home till she had
     ascertained that it was not Drayton House. Moreover, Edward's was the nearest station; she had
     little hope now of seeing him to tea. She sighed, and retraced her steps, and made timid
     inquiries, but could gain no clear information. Presently she heard galloping behind her, and
     the fireman's wild sharp cry of fire. An engine drawn by two powerful brown horses came
     furiously, all on fire itself with red paint and polished steel gleaming in the lights;
     helmeted men clustered on it, and out of one of these helmets looked a face like a fighting
     lion's, the eyes so dilated, the countenance in such towering excitement, the figure half
     rising from his seat as though galloping was too slow and he wanted to fly. It was Edward.
     Mother and son caught sight of one another as the engine thundered by, and he gave her a solemn
     ardent look, and pointed towards the fire; by that burning look and eloquent gesture she knew
     it was something more than a common fire. She trembled and could not move. But this temporary
     weakness was followed by an influx of wild vigour; she forgot her forty-two years, and flew to
     hover round the fire as the hen round water. Unfortunately she was too late to get any nearer
     than the road outside the gates, the crowd was so dense. And, while her pale face and anxious
     eyes, the eyes of a wife and a mother, were bent on that awful fire, the human tide flowed
     swiftly up behind her, and there she was wedged in. She was allowed her foot of ground to stand
     and look like the rest—no more. Mere unit in that mass of panting humanity, hers was one of the
     thousands of upturned faces lurid in the light of the now blazing roof. She saw with thousands
     the hand break the window and clutch the frame; she gasped with the crowd at that terrible and
     piteous sight, and her bosom panted for her fellow-creature in sore peril. But what is this?
     The mob inside utter a great roar of hope; the crowd outside strain every eye.
A gleaming helmet overtops the outer wall. It is a fireman mounting the great elm-tree in the
     madhouse yard. The crowd inside burst in a cheer. He had a rope round his loins; his face was
     to the tree. He mounted and mounted like a cat; higher, and higher, and higher, till he reached
     a branch about twelve feet above the window and as many distant from it laterally; the crowd
     cheered him lustily. But Mrs. Dodd, half distracted with terror, implored them not to encourage
     him. “It is my child!” she cried despairingly; “my poor reckless darling! Come down, Edward;
     for your poor mother's sake, come down.”
“Dear heart,” said a woman, “it is the lady's son. Poor thing!”
“Stand on my knee, ma'am,” said a coal-heaver.
“Oh no, sir, no. I could not look at him for the world. I can only pray for him. Good people,
     pray for us!” And she covered her face, and prayed and trembled and sobbed hysterically. A few
     yards behind was another woman, who had arrived later, yet like her was wedged immovable. This
     woman was more terror-stricken than Mrs. Dodd; and well she might; for she knew who
     was behind that fatal window: the woman's name was Edith Archbold. The flames were now leaping
     through the roof, and surging up towards heaven in waves of fire six feet high. Edward,
     scorched and half blinded, managed to fasten his rope to the bough, and, calculating the
     distances vertical and lateral he had to deal with, took up rope accordingly, and launched
     himself into the air.
The crowd drew their breath so hard it sounded like a murmur. To their horror he missed the
     window, and went swinging back.
There was a cry of dismay. But Edward had never hoped to leap into the window; he went
     swinging by the rope back to the main stem of the tree, gave it a fierce spang with his feet,
     and by this means and a powerful gesture of his herculean loins got an inch nearer the window:
     back again, and then the same game; and so he went swinging to and fro over a wider and wider
     space; and, by letting out an inch of cord each swing, his flying feet came above the
     window-ledge, then a little higher, then higher still; and now, oh sight strange and
     glorious—as this helmeted hero, with lips clenched and great eyes that stared unflinchingly at
     the surging flames, and gleamed supernaturally with inward and outward fire, swang to and fro
     on his frail support still making for the window—the heads of all the hoping, fearing,
     admiring, panting crowd went surging and waving to and fro beneath; so did not their hearts
     only but their agitated bodies follow the course of his body, as it rushed to and fro faster
     and faster through the hot air starred with snow-flakes, and hail, of fire. And those his
     fellow-men for whom the brave fireman made this supernatural effort, did they know their
     desperate condition? Were they still alive? One little hour ago Alfred sat on the bed, full of
     hope. Every minute he expected to hear the Robin put a key into the door. He was all ready, and
     his money in his pocket. Alas! his liberator came not; some screw loose again. Presently he was
     conscious of a great commotion in the house. Feet ran up and down. Then came a smell of
     burning. The elm-tree outside was illuminated. He was glad at first; he had a spite against the
     place. But soon he became alarmed, and hammered at the door and tried to force it. Impossible.
     “Fire!” rang from men's voices. Fire crackled above his head; he ran about the room like a wild
     creature; he sprang up at the window and dashed his hand through, but fell back. He sprang
     again and got his hand on some of the lighter woodwork; he drew himself up nearly to the
     window, and then the wood gave way and he fell to the ground, and striking the back of his
     head, nearly stunned himself; the flames roared fearfully now; and at this David, who had
     hitherto sat unconcerned, started up, and in a stentorian voice issued order upon order to furl
     every rag of sail and bring the ship to the wind. He thought it was a tempest. “Oh hush! hush!”
     cried Alfred in vain.. A beam fell from the roof to the floor, precursor of the rest. On this
     David thought the ship was ashore, and shouted a fresh set of orders proper to the occasion, so
     terribly alike are the angry voices of the sister-elements. But Alfred implored him, and got
     him to kneel down with him, and held his hand, and prayed.
And, even while they kneeled and Alfred prayed, Death and Life met and fought for them. Under
     the door, tight as it was, and through the keyhole, struggled a hot stifling smoke, merciful
     destroyer running before fire; and the shadow of a gigantic figure began to flicker in from the
     outside, and to come and go upon the wall. Alfred did not know what that was, but it gave him a
     vague hope: he prayed aloud as men pray only for their bodies. (The crowd heard him and hushed
     itself breathless.)
The smoke penetrated faster, blinding and stifling; the giant shadow came and went. But now
     the greater part of the roof fell in with an awful report; the blazing timbers thundered down
     to the basement with endless clatter of red-hot tiles; the walls quivered, and the building
     belched skyward a thousand jets of fire like a bouquet of rockets: and then a cloud of smoke.
     Alfred gave up all hope, and prepared to die. Crash! as if discharged from a cannon, came
     bursting through the window, with the roar of an applauding multitude and a mother's unheeded
     scream, a helmeted figure, rope in hand, and alighted erect and commanding on the floor amidst
     a shower of splinters and tinkling glass. “Up, men, for your lives,” roared this fire-warrior,
     clutching them hard, and dragged them both up to their feet by one prodigious gesture: all
     three faces came together and shone in the lurid light; and he knew his father and “the
     Wretch,” and “the Wretch” knew him. “Oh!” “Ah!” passed like pistol shots; but not a word: even
     this strange meeting went for little, so awful was the moment, so great are Death and Fire.
     Edward clawed his rope to the bed; up to the window by it, dropped his line to fireman Jackson
     planted express below, and in another moment was hauling up a rope ladder: this he attached,
     and getting on it and holding his own rope by way of banister, cried, “Now, men, quick, for
     your lives.” But poor David called that deserting the ship, and demurred, till Alfred assured
     him the captain had ordered it. He then submitted directly, touched his forelock to Edward,
     whom he took for that officer, and went down the ladder; Alfred followed.
Now the moment those two figures emerged from the burning pile, Mrs. Dodd, already half dead
     with terror for her son, saw and knew her husband: for all about him it was as light as
     day.
What terror! what joy! what gratitude! what pride! what a tempest of emotions!
But her fears were not ended: Edward, not to overweight the ladder, went dangling by his
     hands along the rope towards the tree. And his mother's eyes stared fearfully from him to the
     other, and her heart hung trembling on her husband descending cautiously, and then on his
     preserver, her son, who was dangling along by the hands on that frail support. The mob cheered
     him royally, but she screamed and hid her face again. At last both her darlings were safe, and
     then the lusty cheers made her thrill with pride and joy, till all of a sudden they seemed to
     die away, and the terrible fire to go out; and the sore-tried wife and mother drooped her head
     and swooned away, wedged in and kept from falling by the crowd.
Inside, the mob parted and made two rushes, one at the rescued men, one at the gallant
     fireman. Alfred and David were overpowered with curiosity and sympathy. They had to shake a
     hundred honest hands, and others still pressing on hurried them nearly off their feet.
“Gently, good friends; don't part us,” said Alfred.
“He is the keeper,” said one of the crowd.
“Yes, I'm his keeper: and I want to get him quietly away. This excitement will do him harm
     else; good friends, help me out by that door.”
“All right,” was the cry, and they rushed with him to the back door. Rooke, who was about
     twenty yards off saw and suspected this movement. He fought his way and struggled after Alfred
     in silence. Presently, to his surprise, Alfred unlocked the door and whipped out with David,
     leaving the door open. Rooke shouted and halloaed: “Stop him! he is escaping,” and struggled
     madly to the door. Now another crowd had been waiting in the meadows; seeing the door open they
     rushed in and the doorway was jammed directly. In the confusion Alfred drew David along the
     side of the wall; told him to stay quiet, bolted behind an outhouse, and then ran across
     country for the bare life.
To his horror David followed him, and with a madman's agility soon caught him.
He snorted like a spirited horse, and shouted cheerily, “Go ahead, messmate; I smell blue
     water.”
“Come on, then,” cried Alfred, half mad himself with excitement, and the pair ran furiously,
     and dashed through hedges and ditches, torn, bleeding, splashed, triumphant; behind them the
     burning madhouse, above them the spangled sky, the fresh free air of liberty blowing in their
     nostrils, and rushing past their ears.
Alfred's chest expanded, he laughed for joy, he sang for joy, he leaped as he went; nor did
     he care where he went. David took the command, and kept snuffing the air, and shaping his
     course for blue water. And so they rushed along the livelong night.
Free.
