
CHAPTER LII
MR. HARDIE raised the money on his scrip, and at great inconvenience, for he was holding on
     five hundred thousand pounds' worth of old Turkish Bonds over an unfavourable settling day, and
     wanted every shilling to pay his broker. If they did not rise by next settling day, he was a
     beggar. However, being now a desperate gamester, and throwing for his last stake, he borrowed
     this sum, and took it within a heavy heart to his appointment with Skinner. Skinner never came.
     Mr. Hardie waited till one o'clock. Two o'clock. No Skinner. Mr. Hardie went home hugging his
     five hundred pounds, but very uneasy. Next day he consulted Peggy. She shook her head, and said
     it looked very ugly. Skinner had most likely got angrier and angrier with thinking on the
     assault. “You will never see him again till the day of the trial: and then he will go down and
     bear false witness against you. Why not leave the country?”
“How can I, simpleton? My money is all locked up in the bargains. No, I'm tied, tied to the
     stake; I'll fight to the last: and, if I'm defeated and disgraced, I'll die, and end it.”
Peggy implored him not to talk so. “I've been down to the court,” said she softly, “to see
     what it is like. There's a great hall; and he must pass through that to get into the little
     places where they try 'em. Let me be in that hall with the five hundred pounds, and I promise
     you he shall never appear against you. We will both go; you with the money, I with my woman's
     tongue.”
He gave her his hand like a shaky monarch, and said she had more wit than he had.
Mr. Heathfield, who had contrived to postpone Hardie v. Hardie six times in spite of
     Compton, could not hurry it on now with his co-operation. It hung fire from some cause or
     another a good fortnight: and in this fortnight Hardie senior endured the tortures of suspense.
     Skinner made no sign. At last, there stood upon the paper for next day, a short case of
     disputed contract, and Hardie v. Hardie.
Now, this day, I must premise, was to settle the whole lawsuit: for while trial of the issue
     was being postponed and postponed, the legal question had been argued and disposed of. The very
     Queen's counsel, unfavourable to the suit, was briefed with Garrow's views, and delivered them
     in court with more skill, clearness, and effect than Garrow ever could; then sat down, and
     whispered over rather contemptuously to Mr. Compton, “That is your argument, I think.”
“And admirably put,” whispered the attorney, in reply.
“Well; now hear Saunders knock it to pieces.”
Instead of that, it was Serjeant Saunders that got maltreated: first one judge had a peck at
     him: then another: till they left him scarce a feather to fly with; and, when Alfred's counsel
     rose to reply, the judges stopped him, and the chief of the court, Alfred's postponing enemy,
     delivered his judgment after this fashion:
“We are all of opinion that this plea is bad in law. By the common law of England no person
     can be imprisoned as a lunatic unless actually insane at the time. It has been held so for
     centuries, and down to the last case. And wisely: for it would be most dangerous to the liberty
     of the subject, if a man could be imprisoned without remedy unless he could prove mala
      fides in the breast of the party incarcerating him. As for the statute, it does not mend
     the matter, but rather the reverse; for it expressly protects duly authorised persons acting
     under the order and certificates, and this must be construed to except from the protection of
     the statute the person making the order.”
The three puisne judges concurred and gave similar reasons. One of them said that if A.
     imprisoned B. for a felon, and B. sued him, it was no defence to say that B., in his
     opinion, had imitated felony. They cited Elliot v. Allen, Anderdon v.
     Burrows, and Lord Mansfield's judgment in a very old case, the name of which I have
     unfortunately forgotten.
Judgment was entered for the plaintiff; and the defendant's ingenious plea struck off the
     record; and Hardie v. Hardie became the leading case. But in law one party often wins
     the skirmish and the other the battle. The grand fight, as I have already said, was to be
     to-day.
But the high hopes and ardour with which the young lovers had once come into court were now
     worn out by the postponement swindle, and the adverse events delay had brought on them. Alfred
     was not there: he was being examined in the schools; and had plumply refused to leave a
     tribunal that named its day and kept it—for Westminster, until his counsel should have actually
     opened the case. He did not believe trial by jury would ever be allowed him. Julia was there,
     but sad and comparatively listless. One of those strange vague reports, which often herald more
     circumstantial accounts, had come home, whispering darkly that her father was dead, and buried
     on an island in the South Sea. She had kept this report from her mother, contrary to Edward's
     wish: but she implored him to restrain his fatal openness. In one thing both these sorely tried
     young people agreed, that there could be no marriage with Alfred now. But here again Julia
     entreated her brother not to be candid; not to tell Alfred this at present. “Oh do not go and
     dispirit him just now,” she said, “or he will do something rash. No, he must and shall get his
     first-class, and win his trial; and then you know any lady will be too proud to marry him, and,
     when he is married and happy, you can tell him I did all I could for him, and hunted up the
     witnesses, and was his loving friend, though I could not—be—his—wife.”
She could not say this without crying; but she said it for all that, and meant it too.
Besides helping Mr. Compton to get up the evidence, this true and earnest friend and lover
     had attended the court day after day, to watch how things were done, and, womanlike, to see
     what pleased and what displeased the court.
The witnesses subpoenaed on either side in Hardie v. Hardie began to arrive at ten
     o'clock, and a tall stately man paraded Westminster Hall, to see if Skinner came with them. All
     other anxieties had merged in this: for the counsel had assured him if nothing unexpected
     turned up, Thomas Hardie would have a verdict, or if not, the damages would be nominal.
At last the court crier cried, with a loud voice, “Hardie v. Hardie.” Julia's eyes
     roved very anxiously for Alfred, and up rose Mr. Garrow, and stated to the court the substance
     of the declaration: “To this,” he said, “three pleas have been pleaded: first, the plea of not
     guilty, which is a formal plea; also another plea, which has been demurred to, and struck off
     the record; and, lastly, that at the time of the alleged imprisonment the plaintiff was of
     unsound mind, and a fit person to be confined; which is the issue now to be tried.”
Mr. Garrow then sat down, very tired of this preliminary work, and wondering when he should
     have the luck to conduct such a case as Hardie v. Hardie; and leaned forward to be
     ready to prompt his senior, a portly counsel, whom Mr. Compton had retained because he was
     great at addressing juries, and no point of law could now arise in the Case.
Colt, Q. C., rose like a tower, knowing very little of the facts, and seeming to know
     everything. He had a prodigious business, and was rather indolent, and often skimmed his brief
     at home, and then mastered it in court—if he got time. Now, it is a good general's policy to
     open a plaintiffs case warily, and reserve your rhetoric for the reply; and Mr. Colt always
     took this line when his manifold engagements compelled him, as in Hardie v. Hardie, to
     teach his case first and learn it afterwards. I will only add, that in the course of his
     opening he was on the edge of seven distinct blunders; but Garrow watched him and always shot a
     whisper like a bullet just in time. Colt took it, and glided away from incipient error
     imperceptibly, and with a tact you can have no conception of. The jury did not detect the
     creaking of this machinery; Serjeant Saunders did, and grinned satirically; so did poor Julia,
     and her cheeks burned and her eyes flashed indignant fire. And horror of horrors, Alfred did
     not appear.
Mr. Colt's opening may be thus condensed: The plaintiff was a young gentleman of great
     promise and distinction, on whom, as usual in these cases of false imprisonment, money was
     settled. He was a distinguished student at Eton and Oxford, and no doubt was ever expressed of
     his sanity till he proposed to marry, and take his money out of his trustees hands by a
     marriage settlement. On this his father, who up to that time had managed his funds as principal
     trustee, showed him great personal hostility for some time, and looked out for a tool: that
     tool he soon found in his brother, the defendant, a person who, it would be proved, had
     actually not seen the plaintiff for a year and a half, yet, with great recklessness and
     inhumanity, had signed away his liberty and his happiness behind his back. Then tools of
     another kind—the kind that anybody can buy, a couple of doctors—were, as usual, easily found to
     sign the certificates. One of these doctors had never seen him but for five minutes, and signed
     in manifest collusion with the other. They decoyed this poor young gentleman away on his
     wedding morning—on his wedding morning, gentlemen, mark that—and consigned him to the worst of
     all dungeons. What he suffered there he must himself relate to you; for we, who have the
     happiness to walk abroad in the air of reason and liberty, are little able to realise the agony
     of mind endured by a sane man confined among the insane. What we undertake is to prove his
     sanity up to the very hour of his incarceration; and also that he was quite sane at the time
     when a brutal attempt to recapture him by violence was made under the defendant's order, and
     defeated by his own remarkable intelligence and courage. Along with the facts the true reason
     why he was imprisoned will probably come out. But I am not bound to prove sinister motives. It
     is for the defendant to prove, if he can, that he had lawful motives for a lawless act; and
     that he exercised due precaution, and did not lend himself recklessly to the dark designs of
     others. If he succeed in this, that may go in mitigation of damages, though it cannot affect
     the verdict. Our principal object is the verdict, which will remove the foul aspersion
     cast on my injured client, and restore him to society. And to this verdict we are entitled,
     unless the other side can prove the plaintiff was insane. Call Alfred Hardie.
And with this he sat down.
An official called Alfred Hardie very loud; he made no reply. Julia rose from her seat with
     dismay painted on her countenance. Compton's, Garrow's, and Colt's heads clashed together.
Mr. Colt jumped up again, and said, “My Lud, I was not aware the gentleman they accuse of
     insanity is just being examined for high honours in the University of Oxford.” Aside to
     Compton, “And if he doesn't come you may give them the verdict.”
“Well,” said the judge, “of course he will be here before you close your case.”
On this the three heads clashed again, and Serjeant Saunders, for the defendant, popped up
     and said with great politeness, and affectation of sympathy, “My Lud, I can quite understand my
     learned friend's hesitation to produce his, principal witness.”
“You understand nothing about the matter,” said Colt cavalierly. “Call Mr. Harrington.”
Mr. Harrington was Alfred's tutor at Eton, and deposed to his sanity there; he was not
     cross-examined. After him they went on step by step with a fresh witness for every six months,
     till they brought him close to the date of his incarceration; then they put in one of Julia's
     witnesses, Peterson, who swore Alfred had talked to him like a sane person that very morning;
     and repeated what had passed. Cross-examination only elicited that he and Alfred were no longer
     good friends, which rather strengthened the evidence. Then Giles and Hannah, now man and wife,
     were called, and swore he was sane all the time he was at Silverton House. Mr. Saunders
     diminished the effect by eliciting that they had left on bad terms with Mr. Baker, and that
     Alfred had given them money since. But this was half cured on re-examination, by being set down
     to gratitude on Alfred's part. And now the judge went to luncheon; and in came a telegraphic
     message to say Alfred was in the fast train coming up. This was good news and bad. They had
     hoped he would drop in before. They were approaching that period of the case, when not to call
     the plaintiff must produce a vile impression. The judge—out of good nature, I suspect—was
     longer at luncheon than usual, and every minute was so much gained to Mr. Compton and Julia,
     who were in a miserable state of anxiety. Yet it was equalled by Richard Hardie's, who never
     entered the court but paced the hall the livelong day to intercept Noah Skinner. And, when I
     tell you that Julia had consulted Mr. Green, and that he had instantly pronounced Mr.
     Barkington to be a man from Barkington who knew the truth about the fourteen thousand pounds,
     and that the said Green and his myrmidons were hunting Mr. Barkington like beagles, you will
     see that R. Hardie's was no vain terror. At last the judge returned, and Mr. Colt was obliged
     to put in his reserves; so called Dr. Sampson. Instantly a very dull trial became an amusing
     one; the scorn with which he treated the opinion of Dr. Wycherley and Mr. Speers, and medical
     certificates in general, was so droll coming from a doctor, and so racily expressed, that the
     court was convulsed. Also in cross-examination by Saunders he sparred away in such gallant
     style with that accomplished advocate that it was mighty refreshing. The judge put in a few
     intelligent questions after counsel had done, and surprised all the doctors in court with these
     words: “I am aware, sir, that you were the main instrument in putting down bloodletting in this
     country.”
What made Sampson's evidence particularly strong was that he had seen the plaintiff the
     evening before his imprisonment.
At this moment three men, all of them known to the reader, entered the court; one was our old
     acquaintance Fullalove, another was of course Vespasian; and the third was the missing
     plaintiff.
A buzz announced his arrival; and expectation rose high. Mr. Colt called him with admirably
     feigned nonchalance; he stepped into the box, and there was a murmur of surprise and admiration
     at his bright countenance and manly bearing.
Of course to give his evidence would be to write “Hard Cash” over again. It is enough to say
     that his examination in chief lasted all that day, and an hour of the next.
Colt took him into the asylum, and made him say what he had suffered there to swell the
     damages. The main points his examination in chief established were his sanity during his whole
     life, the money settled on him, the means the doctors took to irritate him, and then sign him
     excited, the subserviency of his uncle to his father, the double motive his father had in
     getting him imprisoned; the business of the 14,000l..
When Colt sat down at eleven o'clock on the second day, the jury looked indignant, and the
     judge looked very grave, and the case very black.
Mr. Saunders electrified his attorney by saying, “My advice is, don't cross-examine him.”
Heathfield implored him not to take so strange a course.
On this Saunders shrugged his shoulders, rose, and cross-examined Alfred about the vision of
     one Captain Dodd he had seen, and about his suspicions of his father. “Had not Richard Hardie
     always been a kind and liberal father?” To this he assented. “Had he not sacrificed a large
     fortune to his creditors?” Plaintiff believed so. “On reflection, then, did not plaintiff think
     he must have been under an illusion?” No; he had gone by direct evidence.
Confining himself sagaciously to this one question, and exerting all his skill and
     pertinacity, Saunders succeeded in convincing the court that the Hard Cash was a myth: a pure
     chimera. The defendant's case looked up; for there are many intelligent madmen with a single
     illusion.
The re-examination was of course very short, but telling; for Alfred swore that Miss Julia
     Dodd had helped him to carry home the phantom of her father, and that Miss Dodd had a letter
     from her father to say that he was about to sail with the other phantom, the 14,000l..
Here Mr. Saunders interposed, and said that evidence was inadmissible. Let him call Miss
     Dodd.
Colt.—How do you know I'm not going to call her?
The Judge.—If you are, it is superfluous; if not, it is inadmissible.
Mr. Compton cast an inquiring glance up at a certain gallery. A beautiful girl bowed her head
     in reply, with a warm blush and such a flash of her eye, and Mr. Colt said, “As my learned
     friend was afraid to cross-examine the plaintiff on any point but this, and as I mean to
     respond to his challenge, and call Miss Dodd, I will not trouble the plaintiff any
     further.”
Through the whole ordeal Alfred showed a certain flavour of Eton and Oxford that won all
     hearts. His replies were frank and honest, and under cross-examination he was no more to be
     irritated than if Saunders had been Harrow bowling at him, or the Robin sparring with him. The
     serjeant, who was a gentleman, indicated some little regret at the possible annoyance he was
     causing him. Alfred replied with a grand air of good fellowship, “Do not think so poorly of me
     as to suppose I feel aggrieved because you are an able advocate and do your duty to your
     client, sir.”
The Judge.—That is very handsomely said. I am afraid you have got an awkward
     customer, in a case of this kind, Brother Saunders.
Serjt. S.—It is not for want of brains he is mad, my lord.
Alfred.—That is a comfort, any way. (Laughter.)
When counsel had done with him, the judge used his right, and put several shrewd and unusual
     questions to him: asked him to define insanity. He said he could only do it by examples: and he
     abridged several intelligent madmen, their words and ways; and contrasted them with the five or
     six sane people he had fallen in with in asylums; showing his lordship plainly that he
     could tell any insane person whatever from a sane one, and vice versa. This was the
     most remarkable part of the trial, to see this shrewd old judge extracting from a real observer
     and logical thinker those positive indicia of sanity and insanity, which exist, but which no
     lawyer has ever yet been able to extract from any psychological physician in the witness-box.
     At last, he was relieved, and sat sucking an orange among the spectators; for they had parched
     his throat amongst them, I promise you.
Julia Dodd entered the box, and a sunbeam seemed to fill the court. She knew what to do: her
     left hand was gloved, but her white right hand bare. She kissed the book, and gave her evidence
     in her clear, mellow, melting voice; gave it reverently and modestly, for to her the court was
     a church. She said how long she had been acquainted with Alfred, and how his father was
     adverse, and her mother had thought it was because they did not pass for rich, and had told her
     they were rich, and with this she produced David's letter, and she also swore to having met
     Alfred and others carrying her father in a swoon from his father's very door. She deposed to
     Alfred's sanity on her wedding eve, and on the day his recapture was attempted.
Saunders, against his own judgment, was instructed to cross-examine her; and, without meaning
     it, he put a question which gave her deep distress. “Are you now engaged to the plaintiff?” She
     looked timidly round, and saw Alfred, and hesitated. The serjeant pressed her politely, but
     firmly.
“Must I reply to that?” she said piteously.
“If you please.”
“Then, no. Another misfortune has now separated him and me for ever.”
“What is that, pray?”
“My father is said to have died at sea: and my mother thinks he is to blame.”
The judge to Saunders.—What on earth has this to do with Hardie against Hardie?
Saunders.—You are warmly interested in the plaintiff's success?
Julia.—Oh yes, sir.
Colt (aside to Garrow).—The fool is putting his foot into it: there's not a jury in
     England that would give a verdict to part two interesting young lovers.
Saunders.—You are attached to him?
Julia.—Ah, that I do.
This burst, intended for poor Alfred, not the court, baffled cross-examination and grammar
     and everything else. Saunders was wise and generous, and said no more.
Colt cast a glance of triumph, and declined to re-examine. He always let well alone. The
     judge, however, evinced a desire to trace the fourteen thousand pounds from Calcutta; but Julia
     could not help him: that mysterious sum had been announced by letter as about to sail, and then
     no more was heard about it till Alfred accused his father of having it. All endeavours to fill
     this hiatus failed. However, Julia, observing that in courts material objects affect the mind
     most, had provided herself with all the pieces de conviction she could find, and she
     produced her father's empty pocket-book, and said, when he was brought home senseless, this was
     in his breast-pocket.
“Hand it up to me,” said the judge. He examined it, and said it had been in the water.
“Captain Dodd was wrecked off the French coast,” suggested Mr. Saunders.
“My learned friend had better go into the witness-box, if he means to give evidence,” said
     Mr. Colt.
“You are very much afraid of a very little truth,” retorted Saunders.
The judge stopped this sham rencontre, by asking the witness whether her father had been
     wrecked. She said “Yes.”
“And that is how the money was lost,” persisted Saunders.
“Possibly,” said the judge.
“I'm darned if it was,” said Joshua Fullalove composedly.
Instantly, all heads were turned in amazement at this audacious interruption to the soporific
     decorum of an English court. The transatlantic citizen received this battery of eyes with
     complete imperturbability.
“Si-lence!” roared the crier, awaking from a nap, with an instinct that something unusual had
     happened. But the shrewd old judge had caught the sincerity with which the words were uttered,
     and put on his spectacles to examine the speaker.
“Are you for the plaintiff or the defendant?”
“I don't know either of 'em from Adam, my lord. But I know Captain Dodd's pocket-book by the
     bullet-hole.”
“Indeed! You had better call this witness, Mr. Colt.”
“Your lordship must excuse me; I am quite content with my evidence,” said the wary
     advocate.
“Well then, I shall call him as amicus curiae; and the defendant's counsel can
     cross-examine him.”
Fullalove went into the box, was sworn, identified the pocket-book, and swore he had seen
     fourteen thousand pounds in it on two occasions. With very little prompting, he told the
     sea-fight, and the Indian darkie's attempt to steal the money, and pointed out Vespasian as the
     rival darkie who had baffled the attempt. Then he told the shipwreck to an audience now
     breathless—and imagine the astonished interest with which Julia and Edward listened to this
     stranger telling them the new strange story of their own father!—and lastly, the attempt of the
     two French wreckers and assassins, and how it had been baffled. And so the mythical cash was
     tracked to Boulogne.
The judge then put this question, “Did Captain Dodd tell you what he intended to do with
     it?”
Fullalove (reverently).—I think, my lord, he said he was going to give it to his
     wife. (Sharply.) Well, what is it, old hoss? What are you making mugs at me for? Don't you know
     it's clean against law to telegraph a citizen in the witness-box?
The Judge.—This won't do; this won't do.
The Crier.—Silence in the court.
“Do you hyar now what his lordship says?” said Fullalove, with ready tact. “If you know
     anything more, come up hyar and swear it like an enlightened citizen; do you think I am going
     to swear for tew?” With this Vespasian and Fullalove proceeded to change places amidst roars of
     laughter at the cool off-hand way this pair arranged forensicalities; but Serjeant Saunders
     requested Fullalove to stay where he was. “Pray sir,” said he slowly, “who retained you for a
     witness in this cause?”
Fullalove looked puzzled.
“Of course somebody asked you to drop in here so very accidentally: come now, who was
     it?”
“I'm God Almighty's witness dropped from the clouds, I cal'late.”
“Come, sir, no prevarication. How came you here just at the nick of time?”
“Counsellor, when I'm treated polite, I'm ile; but rile me, and I'm thunder stuffed with
     pison: don't you raise my dander, and I'll tell you. I have undertaken to educate this yar
     darkie,”—here he stretched out a long arm, and laid his hand on Vespasian's woolly pate—“and
     I'm bound to raise him to the Eu-ropean model.” (Laughter.) “So I said to him, coming over
     Westminster Bridge, 'Now there's a store hyar where they sell a very extraordinary Fixin; and
     it's called Justice; they sell it tarnation dear; but prime. So I make tracks for the
     very court where I got the prime article three years ago, against a varmint that was breaking
     the seventh and eighth commandments over me, adulterating my patent and then stealing it. Blast
     him!” (A roar of laughter.) “And coming along I said this old country's got some good pints
     after all, old hoss. One is they'll sell you justice dear, but prime in these yar
     courts, if you were born at Kamschatkee; and the other is, hyar darkies are free as air,
     disenthralled by the univarsal genius of British liberty; and then I pitched Counsellor
     Curran's bunkum into this darkie, and he sucked it in like mother's milk, and in we came on
     tiptoe, and the first thing we heard was a freeborn Briton treated wus than ever a nigger in
     Old Kentuck, decoyed away from his gal, shoved into a darned madhouse—the darbies clapped on
     him——”
“We don't want your comments on the case, sir.”
“No, nor any other free and enlightened citizen's, I reckon. Wal, Vespasian and me sat like
     mice in a snowdrift, and hid our feelings out of good manners, being strangers, till his
     lordship got e-tarnally fixed about the Captain's pocket-book. Vesp., says I, this hurts my
     feelings powerful. Says I, this hyar lord did the right thing about my patent: he summed up
     just: and now he is in an everlasting fix himself: one good turn deserves another, I'll get him
     out of this fix, any way.” Here the witness was interrupted with a roar of laughter that shook
     the court. Even the judge leaned back and chuckled, genially though quietly. And right
     sorrowful was every Briton there when Saunders closed abruptly the cross-examination of Joshua
     Fullalove.
His lordship then said he wished to ask Vespasian a question.
Saunders lost patience. “What, another amicus curiae, my lud! This is
     unprecedented.”
“Excuse my curiosity, Brother Saunders,” said the judge ironically. “I wish to trace this
     14,000l. as far as possible. Have you any particular objection to the truth on this head of
     evidence?”
“No, my lud, I never urge objections when I can't enforce them.”
“Then you are a wise man.” (To Vespasian, after he had been sworn), “Pray did Captain Dodd
     tell you what he intended to do with this money?”
“Is, massa judge, massa captan told dis child he got a branker in some place in de old
     country, called Barkinton. And he said dis branker bery good branker, much sartiner not to
     break dan the brank of England. (A howl.) De captan said he take de money to dis yer branker,
     and den hab no more trouble wid it. Den it off my stomach, de captan say, and dis child heerd
     him. Yah!”
The plaintiff's case being apparently concluded, the judge retired for a few minutes.
In the buzz that followed, a note was handed to Mr. Compton; “Skinner! On a hot
     scent. Sure to find him to-day.—N.B. He is wanted by another party. There is something
     curious a-foot.”
Compton wrote on a slip, “For Heaven's sake, bring him directly. In half an hour it will be
     too late.”
Green hurried out and nearly ran against Mr. Richard Hardie, who was moodily pacing
     Westminster Hall at the climax of his own anxiety. To him all turned on Skinner. Five minutes
     passed, ten, fifteen, twenty: all the plaintiff's party had their eyes on the door; but Green
     did not return; and the judge did. Then to gain a few minutes more, Mr. Colt, instructed by
     Compton, rose and said with great solemnity, “We are about to call our last witness: the living
     have testified to my client's sanity, and now we shall read you the testimony of the dead.”
Saunders.—That I object to, of course.
Colt.—Does my learned friend mean to say he objects at random?
Saunders.—Nothing of the kind. I object on the law of evidence—a matter on which my
     learned friend seems to be under a hallucination as complete as his client's about that
     14,000l..
Colt.

 —There's none ever feared 
That the truth should be heard 
But they whom the truth would indict. 
Saunders.—A court of justice is not the place for old songs; and new law.
Colt.—Really, my learned friend is the objective case incarnate. (To Compton.—I
     can't keep this nonsense up for ever. Is Skinner come?) He has a Mania for objection, and with
     your lordship's permission I'll buy a couple of doctors and lock him up in an asylum as he
     leaves the court this afternoon. (Laughter.)
The judge.—A very good plan: then you'll no longer feel the weight of his abilities.
     I conclude, Mr. Colt, you intend to call a witness who will swear to the deceased person's
     hand-writing and that it was written in the knowledge Death was at hand.
Colt.—Certainly, my lord. I can call Miss Julia Dodd.
Saunders.—That I need not take the trouble of objecting to.
The judge (with some surprise).—No, Mr. Colt. That will never do. You have examined
     her, and re-examined her.
I need hardly say Mr. Colt knew very well he could not call Julia Dodd. But he was fighting
     for seconds now, to get in Skinner. “Call Edward Dodd.”
Edward was sworn, and asked if he knew the late Jane Hardie.
“I knew her well,” said he.
“Is that her handwriting?”
“It is.”
“Where was it written?”
“In my mother's house at Barkington.”
“Under what circumstances?”
“She was dying—of a blow given her by a maniac called Maxley.”
“Maxley!” said the judge to counsel. “I remember the Queen v. Maxley. I tried him
     myself at the assizes: it was for striking a young lady with a bludgeon, of which she died.
     Maxley was powerfully defended; and it was proved that his wife had died, and he had been
     driven mad for a time, by her father's bank breaking. The jury would bring in a
     verdict that was no verdict at all; as I took the liberty to tell them at the time. The judges
     dismissed it, and Maxley was eventually discharged.”
Colt.—No doubt that was the case, my lord. To the witness.—Did Jane Hardie know she
     was dying?
“Oh yes, sir. She told us all so.”
“To whom did she give this letter?”
“To my sister.”
“Oh, to your sister? To Miss Julia Dodd?”
“Yes, sir. But not for herself. It was to give to Alfred Hardie.”
“Can you read the letter? It is rather faintly written. It is written in pencil, my
     lord.”
“I could read it, sir; but I hope you will excuse me. She that wrote it was very,
     very dear to me.”
The young man's full voice faltered as he uttered these words, and he turned his lion-like
     eyes soft and imploring on the judge. That venerable and shrewd old man, learned in human
     nature as well as in law, comprehended in a moment, and said kindly, “You misunderstand him.
     Witnesses do not read letters out in court. Let the letter be handed up to me.” This
     was fortunate, for the court cuckoo, who intones most letters, would have read all the sense
     and pathos out of this, with his monotonous sing-song.
The judge read it carefully to himself with his glasses, and told the jury it seemed a
     genuine document: then the crier cried “Silence in the court,” and his lordship turned towards
     the jury and read the letter slowly and solemnly:
“DEAR, DEAR BROTHER,—Your poor little Jane lies dying, suddenly but not painfully, and my
      last earthly thoughts are for my darling brother. Some wicked person has said you are insane.
      I deny this with my dying breath and my dying hand. You came to me the night before the
      wedding that was to be, and talked to me most calmly, rationally and kindly; so that I could
      not resist your reasons, and went to your wedding, which, till then, I did not intend. Show
      these words to your slanderers when I am no more. But oh! Alfred, even this is of little
      moment compared with the world to come. By all our affection, grant me one request. Battered,
      wounded, dying in my prime, what would be my condition but for the Saviour, whom I have loved,
      and with whom I hope soon to be. He smoothes the bed of death for me, He lights the dark
      valley; I rejoice to die and be with Him. Oh, turn to Him, dear brother, without one hour's
      delay, and then how short will be this parting. This is your dying sister's one request, who
      loves you dearly.”
With the exception of Julia's sobs, not a sound was heard as the judge read it. Many eyes
     were wet: and the judge himself was visibly affected, and pressed his handkerchief a moment to
     his eyes. “These are the words of a Christian woman, gentlemen,” he said. And there was
     silence. A girl's hand seemed to have risen from the grave to defend her brother and rend the
     veil from falsehood.
Mr. Colt, out of pure tact, subdued his voice to the key of the sentiment thus awakened, and
     said impressively, “Gentlemen of the jury, that is our case:” and so sat down.
