
CHAPTER XXXVI
THERE was not a moment to lose, so Green emptied the pocketbook into his hat, and sifted the
     contents in a turn of the hand, announcing each discovery in a whisper to his excited and
     peering associates.
“A lot of receipts.”
“Of no use to any one but me,” said the prisoner earnestly.
“Two miniatures; gold rims, pinchbeck backs.”
“They are portraits of my children when young: Heaven forgive me, I could not give them up to
     my creditors: surely, surely, you will not rob me of them.”
“Stash your gab,” said Mr. Green roughly. “Here's a guinea, Queen Anne's reign.”
“It belonged to my great-grandfather: take it, but you will let me redeem it; I will give 5l.
     for it poor as I am: you can leave it on my door-step, and I'll leave the 5l..”
“Stow your gab. Letters; papers covered with figures. Stay, what is this? a lot of
     memoranda.”
“They are of the most private and delicate character. Pray do not expose my family
     misfortunes.” And Mr. Hardie, who of late had been gathering composure, showed some signs of
     agitation; the two figures glaring over his shoulder shared it, and his remonstrance only made
     Green examine the papers keenly: they might contain some clue to the missing money. It proved a
     miscellaneous record: the price of Stocks at various days; notes of the official assignee's
     remarks in going over the books, etc. At last, however, Green's quick eye fell upon a
     fainter entry in pencil; figures: 1, 4; yes, actually 14,000l.. “All right,” he said: and took
     the paper close to the lantern, and began to spell it out—
“'This day Alfred told me to my face I had 14,000l. of Captain Dodd's. We had an angry
     discussion. What can he mean? Drs. Wycherley and Osmond, this same day, afflicted me with hints
     that he is deranged, or partly. I saw no signs of it before. Wrote to my brother entreating him
     to give me 200l. to replace the sum which I really have wronged this respectable and now most
     afflicted family of. I had better withdraw——'” Here Mr. Hardie interrupted him with sorrowful
     dignity: “These are mere family matters; if you are a man, respect them.”
Green went reading on like Fate: “'Better withdraw my opposition to the marriage, or else it
     seems my own flesh and blood will go about the place blackening my reputation.'”
Mr. Hardie stamped on the ground. “I tell you, on my honour as a gentleman, there's no money
     there but my grandfather's guinea. My money is all in my waistcoat pocket, where you will
      not look.”
A flutter of uneasiness seemed to come over the detective: he darkened his lantern, and
     replaced the pocket-book hurriedly in the prisoner's breast, felt him all over in a minute, and
     to keep up the farce, robbed him.
“Only eight yellow boys,” said he contemptuously to his mates. He then shipped the money back
     into Hardie's coat-pocket, and conducted him to his own gate, tied him to it by the waist, and
     ordered him not to give the alarm for ten minutes on pain of death.
“I consent,” said Mr. Hardie, “and thank you for abstaining from violence.”
“All right, my tulip,” said Mr. Green cheerfully, and drew his companions quietly away. But
     the next moment he began to run, and making a sudden turn, dived into a street then into a
     passage, and so winded and doubled till he got to a small public-house: he used some flash
     word, and they were shown a private room. “Wait here an hour for me,” he whispered; “I must see
     who liberates him, and whether he is really as innocent as he reads, or we have been
     countermined by the devil's own tutor.”
The unexpected turn the evidence had taken—evidence of their own choosing, too—cleared Mr.
     Hardie with the unprofessionals. Edward embraced this conclusion as a matter of course, and
     urged the character of that gentleman's solitary traducer: Alfred was a traitor, and therefore
     why not a slanderer?
Even Sampson, on the whole, inclined to a similar conclusion.
At this crisis of the discussion a red-haired pedlar, with very large whiskers and the
     remains of a black eye, put his head in, and asked whether Tom Green was there. “No,” said the
     Doctor stoutly, not desiring company of this stamp. “Don't know the lad.”
The pedlar laughed: “There is not many that do know him at all hours; however, he is
     here, sir.” And he whipped off the red hair, and wiped off the black eye, and ho, Green
      ipse. He received their compliments on his Protean powers, and told them he had been
     just a minute too late. Mr. Hardie was gone, and so he had lost the chance of seeing who came
     to help him, and of hearing the first words that passed between the two. This, he said, was a
     very great pity; for it would have shown him in one moment whether certain suspicions of his
     were correct. Pressed as to what these suspicions were, he begged to be excused saying any more
     for the present. The Doctor, however, would not let him off so, but insisted on his candid
     opinion.
“Well, sir,” said Green, “I never was more puzzled in my life, owing to not being near hand
     when he was untied. It looks all square, however. There's one little thing that don't fit
     somehow.”
They both asked in a breath what that was.
“The sovs. were all marked.”
They asked how he knew; and had he got them in his pocket to show?
Green uttered a low chuckling laugh: “What, me fake the beans, now I live on this side of the
     hedge? Never knew a cove mix his liquors that way but it hurt his health soon or late. No, I
     took them out of one pocket and felt of them as I slipped them into the other. Ye see, gents,
     to do any good on my lay, a man must train his senses as well as his mind: he must have a
     hare's ear, and a hawk's eye, a bloodhound's nose, and a lady's hand with steel fingers and a
     silk skin. Now look at that bunch of fives,” continued the master; and laid a hand white and
     soft as a duchess's on the table: “it can put the bracelets on a giant, or find a sharper's
     nail-mark on the back of the knave of clubs. The beans were marked. Which it is a small thing,
     but it don't fit the rest. Here's an unsuspicious gent took by surprise, in moonlight
     meditation fancy free, and all his little private family matters found in his innocent bosom,
     quite promiscuous; but his beans marked. That don't dovetail nohow. Gents, did ever you hear of
     the man that went to the bottom of the bottomless pit to ease his mind? Well, he was the head
     of my family. I must go to the bottom whether there's one or not. And just now I see but one
     way.”
“And what is that?” inquired both his companions in some alarm.
“Oh, I mustn't threaten it,” said Green, “or I shall never have the stomach to do it. But
     dear me, this boozing ken is a very unfit place for you,—you are champagne-gents, not dog's
     nose ones. Now you part and make tracks for home, one on foot and one in a fly. You won't see
     me, nor hear of me again, till I've something fresh.”
And so the confederates parted, and Sampson and Edward met at Albion Villa; and Edward told
     his mother what they had done, and his conviction that Mr. Hardie was innocent, and Alfred a
     slanderer as well as a traitor: “And indeed,” said he, “if we had but stopped to reflect, we
     should have seen how unlikely the money was not to be lost in the Agra. Why, the
      'Tiser says she went to pieces almost directly she struck. What we ought to have done
     was, not to listen to Alfred Hardie like fools, but write to Lloyd's like people in their
     senses. I'll do it this minute, and find out the surviving officers of the ship: they will be
     able to give us information on that head.” Mrs. Dodd approved; and said she would write to her
     kind correspondent Mrs. Beresford, and she did sit down to her desk at once. As for Sampson, he
     returned to town next morning, not quite convinced, but thoroughly staggered; and determined
     for once to resign his own judgment, and abide the result of Mrs. Dodd's correspondence and Mr.
     Green's sagacity. All he insisted on was, that his placard about Alfred should be continued: he
     left money for this, and Edward, against the grain, consented to see it done. But placards are
     no monopoly: in the afternoon only a section of Sampson's was visible in most parts of the town
     by reason of a poster to this effect pasted half over it:—
 “FIFTY GUINEAS REWARD. 
“Whereas, yesterday evening at ten o'clock Richard Hardie, Esq., of Musgrove Cottage,
      Barkington, was assaulted at his own door by three ruffians, who rifled his pockets, and read
      his private memoranda, and committed other acts of violence, the shock of which has laid him
      on a bed of sickness, the above reward shall be paid to any person, or persons, who will give
      such information as shall lead to the detection of all or any one of the miscreants concerned
      in this outrage.
“The above reward will be paid by Mr. Thomas Hardie of Clare Court, Yorkshire.”
On this the impartial police came to Mr. Hardie's and made inquiries. He received them in
     bed, and told them particulars: and they gathered from Peggy that she had heard a cry of
     distress, and opened the kitchen door, and that Betty and she had ventured out together, and
     found poor master tied to the gate with an old cord: this she produced, and the police
     inspected and took it away with them.
At sight of that Notice, Edward felt cold and then hot and realised the false and perilous
     position into which he had been betrayed: “So much for being wiser than the law,” he said:
     “what are we now but three footpads?” This, and the insult his sister had received made the
     place poison to him; and hastened their departure by a day or two. The very next day (Thursday)
     an affiche on the walls of Albion Villa announced that Mr. Chippenham, auctioneer,
     would sell, next Wednesday, on the premises, the greater part of the furniture, plate, china,
     glass, Oriental inlaid boxes and screens, with several superb India shawls, scarfs, and
     dresses; also a twenty-one years' lease of the villa, seventeen to run.
Edward took unfurnished apartments in London, near Russell Square: a locality in which, as he
     learned from the 'Tiser, the rooms were large and cheap. He packed just so much
     furniture as was essential; no knick-knacks. It was to go by rail on Monday; Mrs. Dodd and
     Julia were to follow on Tuesday: Edward to stay at Barkington and look after the sale.
Meantime their secret ally, Mr. Green, was preparing his threatened coup. The more
     he reflected the more he suspected that he had been outwitted by Peggy Black. She had led him
     on, and the pocket-book had been planted for him. If so, why Peggy was a genius, and in his own
     line; and he would marry her, and so kill two birds with one stone: make a Detective of her
     (there was a sad lack of female detectives); and, once his wife, she would split on her master,
     and he should defeat that old soldier at last, and get a handsome slice of the 14,000l..
He manoeuvred thus: first, he went back to London for a day or two to do other jobs, and to
     let this matter cool; then he returned, and wrote from a town near Barkington to Peggy Black,
     telling her he had been sent away suddenly on a job, but his heart had remained behind with his
     Peggy: would she meet him at the gate at nine that evening? he had something very particular to
     say to her. As to the nature of the business, the enclosed would give her a hint. She might
     name her own day, and the sooner the better.
The enclosed was a wedding-ring.
At nine this extraordinary pair of lovers met at the gate; but Peggy seemed hardly at her
     ease; said her master would be coming out and catching her; perhaps they had better walk up the
     road a bit. “With all my heart,” said Green; but he could not help a little sneer: “Your
     master?” said he: “why he is your servant, as I am. What, is he jealous?”
“I don't know what you mean, young man,” said Peggy.
“I'll tell you when we are married.”
“La, that is a long time to wait for my answer: why we ain't asked in church yet.”
“There's no need of that; I can afford a special licence.”
“Lawk a daisy: why you be a gentleman, then.”
“No, but I can keep my wife like a lady.”
“You sounds very tempting,” murmured Peggy, throwing her skirt over her head—for a drizzle
     was beginning—and walking slower and slower.
Then he made hot love to her, and pressed her hard to name the day.
She coquetted with the question till they came near the mouth of a dark lane, called Lovers'
     Walk; then, as he insisted on an answer, she hung her head bashfully, and coughed a little
     cough. At which preconcerted signal a huge policeman sprang out of the lane and collared Mr.
     Green.
On this Peggy, who was all Lie from head to heel, uttered a little scream of dismay and
     surprise.
Mr. Green laughed.
“Well, you are a downy one,” said he. “I'll marry you all the more for thus.”
The detective put his hands suddenly inside the policeman's, caught him by the bosom with his
     right hand by way of fulcrum; and with his left by the chin, which he forced violently back,
     and gave him a slight Cornish trip at the same moment; down went the policeman on the back of
     his head a fearful crack. Green then caught the astonished Peggy round the neck, kissed her
     lips violently, and fled like the wind; removed all traces of his personal identity, and up to
     London by the train in the character of a young swell, with a self-fitting eyeglass and a long
     moustache the colour of his tender mistress's eyebrow: tow.
From town he wrote to her, made her a formal offer of marriage; and gave her an address to
     write to “should she at any time think more kindly of him and of his sincere affection.”
I suppose he specified sincere because it was no longer sincere: he hurled the offer into
     Musgrove Cottage by way of an apple of discord—at least so I infer from the memorandum, with
     which he retired at present from the cash hunt.
“Mr. Hardie has the stiff, I think: but, if so, it is planted somewhere—doesn't carry it
     about him; my Peggy is his mistress: nothing to be done till they split.”
Victorious so far, Mr. Hardie had still one pressing anxiety: Dr. Sampson's placard: this had
     been renewed, and stared him everywhere in the face. Every copy of it he encountered made him
     shiver. If he had been a man of impulse, he would have torn it down wherever he saw it; but he
     knew that would not do. However, learning from Jane, who had it from old Betty, who had it from
     Sarah, that Mrs. and Miss Dodd would leave for London the day before the sale, and Edward the
     day after it, he thought he might venture in the busy intermediate time to take some liberties
     with it. This he did with excellent tact and judgment. Peggy and a billsticker were seen in
     conference, and, soon after, the huge bills of a travelling circus were pasted right over both
     the rival advertisements in which the name of Hardie figured. The consequence was, Edward
     raised no objection: he was full of the sale for one thing; but I suspect he was content to see
     his own false move pasted over on such easy terms.
One morning Peggy brought in the letters, and Jane saw one in Alfred's handwriting. She
     snatched it up, and cried “Papa, from Alfred!” And she left off making the tea, while her
     father opened it with comparative composure.
This coolness, however, did not outlast the perusal: “The young ruffian!” said he; “would you
     believe it Jenny, he accuses me of being the cause of his last business.”
“Let me see, papa.”
He held her out the letter; but hesitated and drew it back. “My dear, it would give you pain
     to see your poor father treated so. Here's a specimen: 'What could they expect but that the son
     of a sharper would prove a traitor? You stole her money; I her affections, of which I am
     unworthy.' Now what do you think of that?”
“Unhappy Alfred!” said Jane. “No, papa, I would not read it, if you are insulted in it. But
     where is he?”
“The letter is dated Paris. See!” And he showed her the date. “But he says here he is coming
     back to London directly; and he orders me in the most peremptory way to be ready with my
     accounts, and pay him over his fortune. Well, he is alive, at all events: really my good, kind,
     interfering, pragmatical friend Sampson, with his placards, made me feel uneasy, more uneasy
     than I would own to you, Jenny.”
“Unhappy Alfred!” cried Jane, with the tears in her eyes; “and poor papa!”
“Oh, never mind me,” said Mr. Hardie; “now that I know no harm has come to him, I really
     don't care a straw: I have got one child that loves me, and that I love.”
“Ah yes, dear, dear papa, and that will always love you, and never, never disobey you in
     small things or great.” She rose from the table and sealed this with a pious kiss; and, when
     she sat down with a pink flush on her delicate cheek, his hard eye melted and dwelt on her with
     beaming tenderness. His heart yearned over her, and a pang went through it: to think that he
     must deceive even her, the one sweet soul that loved him!
It was a passing remorse: the successful plotter soon predominated, and it was with unmixed
     satisfaction he saw her put on her bonnet directly after breakfast and hurry off to Albion
     Villa to play the part of his unconscious sieve.
He himself strolled in the opposite direction, not to seem to be watching her.
He was in good spirits: felt like a general, who, after repulsing many desperate attacks
     successfully, orders an advance, and sees the tide of battle roll away from his bayonets. His
     very body seemed elastic, indomitable; he walked lustily out into the country, sniffed the
     perfumed hedges, and relished life. To be sure he could not walk away from all traces of his
     misdeeds; he fell in with objects that to an ordinary sinner might have spoiled the walk, and
     even marred the spring-time. He found his creditor Maxley with grizzly beard and bloodshot
     eyes, belabouring a milestone; and two small boys quizzing him, and pelting him with mud: and
     soon after he met his creditor, old Dr. Phillips, in a cart, coming back to Barkington to end
     his days there, at the almshouse. But to our triumphant Bankrupt and Machiavel these things
     were literally nothing: he paced complacently on, and cared no more for either of those his
     wrecks than the smiling sea itself seems to care for the dead ships and men it washed ashore a
     week ago.
He came home before luncheon for his gossip with Jane; but she had not returned. All the
     better; her budget would be the larger.
To while the time he got his file of the Times, and amused himself noting down the
     fluctuations in Peruvian bonds.
While thus employed he heard a loud knock at his door, and soon after Peggy's voice and a
     man's in swift collision. Hasty feet came along the passage, the parlour door opened, and a
     young man rushed in pale as ashes, and stared at him; he was breathless, and his lips moved,
     but no sound came.
It was Edward Dodd.
Mr. Hardie rose like a tower and manned himself to repulse this fresh assault.
The strange visitor gasped out, “You are wanted at our house.”
