

SCENE II
IT was, indeed, the general opinion in Clinton Magna that John Bolderfield—or
     “Borrofull,” as the village pronounced it, took his sister-in-law's death too lightly. The
     women especially pronounced him a hard heart. Here was “poor Eliza” gone, Eliza who had kept
     him decent and comfortable for forty years, ever since he was a lad, and he could go about
     whistling, and—to talk to him—as gay as a lark! Yet John contributed handsomely to the burial
     expenses—Eliza having already, through her burial club, provided herself with a more than
     regulation interment; and he gave Jim's Louisa her mourning. Nevertheless these things did not
     avail. It was felt instinctively that he was not beaten down as he ought to have been, and Mrs.
     Saunders, the smith's
      wife, was applauded when she said to her neighbours that “you
     couldn't expeck a man with John Bolderfield's money to have as many feelin's as other people.”
     Whence it would seem that the capitalist is no more truly popular in small societies than in
     large.
John, however, did not trouble himself about these things. He was hard at work harvesting for
     Muster Hill's widow, and puzzling his head day and night as to what to do with his box.
When the last field had been carried and the harvest supper was over, he came home late, and
     wearied out. His working life at Clinton Magna was done; and the family he had worked for so
     long was broken up in distress and poverty. Yet he felt only a secret exultation. Such toil and
     effort behind—such a dreamland in front!
Next day he set to work to wind up his affairs. The furniture of the cottage was left to
     Eliza's son Jim, and the daughter had arranged for the carting of it to the house twelve miles
     off where her parents
      lived. She was to go with it on the morrow, and John would
     give up the cottage and walk over to Frampton, where he had already secured a lodging.
Only twenty-four hours!—and he had not yet decided. Which was it to be—Saunders, after all—or
     the savings bank—or Bessie?
He was cording up his various possessions—a medley lot—in different parcels and bundles when
     Bessie Costrell knocked at the door. She had already offered to stow away anything he might
     like to leave with her.
“Well, I thought you'd be busy,” she said as she walked in, “an' I came up to lend a hand. Is
     them the things you're goin' to leave me to take care on?”
John nodded.
“Field's cart, as takes Louisa's things to-morrer, is a-goin' to deliver these at your place
     first. They're more nor I thought they would be. But you can put 'em anywheres.”
“Oh, I'll see to them.”

She sat down and watched him tie the knots of the last parcel.
“There's some people as is real ill-natured,” she said presently, in an angry voice.
“Aye?” said John, looking up sharply. “What are they sayin' now?”
“It's Muster Saunders. 'Ee's allus sayin' nassty things about other folks. And there'd be
     plenty of fault to be found with 'im, if onybody was to try. An' Sally Saunders eggs him on
     dreadful.”
Saunders was the village smith, a tall, brawny man, of great size and corresponding wisdom,
     who had been the village arbiter and general councillor for a generation. There was not a will
     made in Clinton Magna that he did not advise upon; not a bit of contentious business that he
     had not a share in; not a family history that he did not know. His probity was undisputed; his
     ability was regarded with awe; but as he had a sharp tongue and was no respecter of persons,
     there was of course an opposition.

John took a seat on the wooden box he had just been cording, and mopped his brow. His full
     cheeks were crimson, partly with exertion, partly with sudden annoyance.
“What's 'ee been sayin' now? Though it doan't matter a brass farthin' to me what 'ee
     says.”
“He says you 'aven't got no proper feelin's about poor Eliza, an' you'd ought to
     have done a great deal more for Louisa. But 'ee says you allus were a mean one with your
     money—an' you knew that 'ee knew it—for 'ee'd stopped you takin' an unfair
     advantage more nor once. An' 'ee didn't believe as your money would come to any good; for now
     Eliza was gone you wouldn't know how to take care on it.”
John's eyes flamed.
“Oh! 'ee says that, do 'ee? Well, Saunders wor allus a beast—an' a beast 'ee'll be.”
He sat with his chin on his large dirty hands, ruminating furiously.
It was quite true that Saunders had thwarted him
      more than once. There was old Mrs. Moulsey at the shop, when
     she wanted to buy those cottages in Potter's Row—and there was Sam Field the higgler—both of
     them would have borrowed from him if Saunders hadn't cooled them off. Saunders said it was a
     Jew's interest he was asking—because there was security—but he wasn't going to accept a
     farthing less than his shilling a pound for three months—not he! So they might take it or leave
     it. And Mrs. Moulsey got hers from the Building Society, and Sam Field made shift to go
     without. And John Bolderfield was three pounds poorer that quarter than he need have been—all
     along of Saunders. And now Saunders was talking “agen him” like this—blast him!
“Oh, an' then he went on,” pursued Bessie with gusto, “about your bein' too ignorant to put
     it in the post-office. 'Ee said you'd think Edwards would go an' spend it” (Edwards was the
     post-master), “an' then he laughed fit to split 'imself. Yer couldn't see more nor the length
     of your own nose, he said,—
      it was edication you wanted. As for 'im, 'ee
     said, 'ee'd have kep' it for you if you'd asked him, but you'd been like a bear with a sore
     'ead, 'ee said, ever since Mrs. Moulsey's affair—so 'ee didn't suppose you would.”
“Well, 'ee's about right there,” said John, grimly; “'ee's talkin' sense for onst when 'ee
     says that. I'd dig a hole in the hill and bury it sooner nor I'd trust it to 'im—I would, by—”
     he swore vigorously. “A thieving set of magpies is all them Saunders—cadgin' 'ere and cadgin'
     there.”
He spoke with fierce contempt, the tacit hatred of years leaping to sight. Bessie's bright
     brown eyes looked at him with sympathy.
“It was just his nassty spite,” she said. “He knew 'ee could never ha' done
     it—not what you've done—out o' your wages. Not unless 'ee got Sally to tie 'im to the dresser
     with ropes so as 'ee couldn't go a-near the Spotted Deer no more!”
She laughed like a merry child at her own
      witticism, and John relished it too, though he was not in a
     laughing mood.
“Why,” continued Bessie with enthusiasm, “it was Muster Drew as said to me the other
     afternoon, as we was walkin' 'ome from the churchyard, says 'ee, ‘Mrs. Costrell, I call it
     splendid what John's done—I do,’ 'ee says. ‘A labourer on fifteen shillin's a
     week—why, it's an example to the county,’ 'ee says. ‘'Ee ought to be showed.’”
John's face relaxed. The temper and obstinacy in the eyes began to yield to the weak
     complacency which was their more normal expression.
There was silence for a minute or two. Bessie sat with her hands on her lap and her face
     turned towards the open door. Beyond the cherry-red phloxes outside it, the ground fell rapidly
     to the village, rising again beyond the houses to a great stubble field, newly shorn. Gleaners
     were already in the field, their bent figures casting sharp shadows on the golden upland, and
     the field itself stretched upwards to a great wood that lay folded round the
      top of a spreading hill. To the left, beyond the hill, a wide
     plain travelled into the sunset, its level spaces cut by the scrawled elms and hedgerows of the
     nearer landscape. The beauty of it all—the beauty of an English midland—was of a modest and
     measured sort, depending chiefly on bounties of sun and air, on the delicacies of gentle curves
     and the pleasant intermingling of wood and cornfield, of light spaces with dark, of solid earth
     with luminous sky.
Such as it was, however, neither Bessie nor John spared it a moment's attention. Bessie was
     thinking a hundred busy thoughts. John, on the other hand, had begun to consider her with an
     excited scrutiny. She was a handsome woman, as she sat in the doorway with her fine brown head
     turned to the light. But John naturally was not thinking of that. He was in the throes of
     decision.
“Look 'ere, Bessie,” he said suddenly; “what 'ud you say if I wor to ask Isaac an' you to
     take care on it?”

Bessie started slightly. Then she looked frankly round at him. She had very keen, lively
     eyes, and a bright red-brown colour on thin cheeks. The village applied to her the epithet
     which John's thoughts had applied to Muster Hill's widow. They said she was “caselty,” which
     means flighty, haphazard, excitable; but she was popular, nevertheless, and had many
     friends.
It was, of course, her own settled opinion that her uncle ought to leave that box with her
     and Isaac; and it had wounded her vanity, and her affection besides, that John had never yet
     made any such proposal, though she knew—as, indeed, the village knew—that he was perplexed as
     to what to do with his hoard. But she had never dared to suggest that he should leave it with
     her, out of fear of Eliza Bolderfield. Bessie was well aware that Eliza thought ill of her, and
     would dissuade John from any such arrangement if she could. And so formidable was Eliza—a woman
     of the hardest and sourest virtue—when she chose, that Bessie was
      afraid of her, even on her death-bed, though generally ready
     enough to quarrel with other people. Nevertheless, Bessie had always felt that it would be a
     crying shame and slight if she and Isaac did not have the guardianship of the money. She
     thirsted, perhaps, to make an impression upon public opinion in the village, which, as she
     instinctively realized, held her cheaply. And then, of course, there was the secret thought of
     John's death, and what might come of it. John had always loudly proclaimed that he meant to
     spend his money, and not leave it behind him. But the instinct of saving, once formed, is
     strong. John, too, might die sooner than he thought—and she and Isaac had children.
She had come up, indeed, that afternoon, haunted by a passionate desire to get the money into
     her hands; yet the mere sordidness of “expectations” counted for less in the matter than one
     would suppose. Vanity, a vague wish to ingratiate herself with her uncle, to avoid a
     slight—these were, on the whole, her strongest motives. At any rate,
      when he had once asked her the momentous question, she knew
     well what to say to him.
“Well, if you arst me,” she said hastily, “of course we think as it's only
     nateral you should leave it with Isaac an' me, as is your own kith and kin. But we wasn't goin'
     to say nothin'; we didn't want to be pushin' of ourselves forward.”
John rose to his feet. He was in his shirt-sleeves, which were rolled up. He pulled them
     down, put on his coat, an air of crisis on his fat face.
“Where 'ud you put it?” he said.
“Yer know that cupboard by the top of the stairs? It 'ud stand there easy. And the cupboard's
     got a good lock to it; but we'd 'ave it seen to, to make sure.”
She looked up at him eagerly. She longed to feel herself trusted and important. Her self-love
     was too often mortified in these respects.
John fumbled round his neck for the bit of black cord on which he kept two keys—the key of his
      room while he was away, and the key of the box itself.
“Well, let's get done with it,” he said. “I'm off to-morrer mornin', six o'clock. You go and
     get Isaac to come down.”
“I'll run,” said Bessie, catching up her shawl and throwing it over her head. “He wor just
     finishin' his tea.”
And she whirled out of the cottage, running up the steep road behind it as fast as she could.
     John was vaguely displeased by her excitement; but the die was cast. He went to make his
     arrangements.
Bessie ran till she was out of breath. When she reached her own house, a cottage in a side
     lane above the Bolderfields' cottage and overlooking it from the back, she found her husband
     sitting with his pipe at the open door and reading his newspaper. Three out of her own four
     children were playing in the lane, otherwise there was no one about.
Isaac greeted her with a nod and slight lightening of the eyes, which, however, hardly disturbed
      the habitual sombreness of the face. He was a dark, finely
     featured man, with grizzled hair, carrying himself with an air of sleepy melancholy. He was
     much older than his wife, and was a prominent leader in the little Independent chapel of the
     village. His melancholy could give way on occasion to fits of violent temper. For instance, he
     had been almost beside himself when Bessie, who had leanings to the Establishment, as providing
     a far more crowded and entertaining place of resort on Sundays than her husband's chapel, had
     rashly proposed to have the youngest baby christened in church. Other Independents did it
     freely—why not she? But Isaac had been nearly mad with wrath, and Bessie had fled upstairs from
     him, with her baby, and bolted the bedroom door in bodily terror. Otherwise, he was a most
     docile husband—in the neighbours' opinion, docile to absurdity. He complained of nothing, and
     took notice of little. Bessie's untidy ways left him indifferent; his main interest was in a
     kind of religious dreaming, and in
      an Independent paper to which he occasionally wrote a letter.
     He was gardener at a small house on the hill, and had rather more education than most of his
     fellows in the village. For the rest, he was fond of his children, and, in his heart of hearts,
     exceedingly proud of his wife, her liveliness and her good looks. She had been a remarkably
     pretty girl when he married her, some eight years after his first wife's death, and there was a
     great difference of age between them. His two elder children by his first marriage had long
     since left the home. The girl was in service. It troubled him to think of the boy, who had
     fallen into bad ways early. Bessie's children were all small, and she herself still young,
     though over thirty.
When Bessie came up to him, she looked round to see that no one could hear. Then she stooped
     and told him her errand in a panting whisper. He must go down and fetch the box at once. She
     had promised John Borrofull that they would stand by him. They were his own flesh and blood—and the
      cupboard had a capital lock—and there wasn't no fear of it at
     all.
Isaac listened to her at first with amazement, then sulkily. She had talked to him often
     certainly about John's money, but it had made little impression on his dreamer's sense. And now
     her demand struck him disagreeably.
He didn't want the worrit of other people's money, he said. Let them as owned it keep it;
     filthy lucre was a snare to all as had to do with it; and it would only bring a mischief to
     have it in the house.
After a few more of these objections, Bessie lost her temper. She broke into a torrent of
     angry arguments and reproaches, mainly turning, it seemed, upon a recent visit to the house of
     Isaac's eldest son. The drunken ne'er-do-weel had given Bessie much to put up with. Oh
      yes!—she was to be plagued out of her life by Isaac's belongings, and he wouldn't
     do a pin's worth for her. Just let him see next time, that was all.

Isaac smoked vigorously through it all. But she was hammering on a sore point.
“Oh, it's just like yer!” Bessie flung at him at last in desperation. “You're allus the
     same—a mean-spirited feller, stannin' in your children's way! 'Ow do you know who
     old John's going to leave his money to? 'Ow do you know as he wouldn't leave it to
      them poor innercents”—she waved her hand tragically towards the children playing
     in the road—“if we was just a bit nice and friendly with him now 'ee's gettin' old? But you
     don't care, not you!—one 'ud think yer were made o' money—an' that little one there not got the
     right use of his legs!”
She pointed, half crying, to the second boy, who had already shown signs of hip disease.
Isaac still smoked, but he was troubled in his mind. A vague presentiment held him, but the
     pressure brought to bear upon him was strong.
“I tell yer the lock isn't a good 'un!” he said, suddenly removing his pipe.
Bessie stopped instantly in the middle of another
      tirade. She was leaning against the door, arms akimbo, eyes
     alternately wet and flaming.
“Then, if it isn't,” she said, with a triumphant change of tone, “I'll soon get Flack to see
     to it—it's nobbut a step. I'll run up after supper.”
Flack was the village carpenter.
“An' there's mother's old box as takes up the cupboard,” continued Isaac gruffly.
Bessie burst out laughing.
“Oh! yer old silly,” she said. “As if they couldn't stand one top o' the t'other. Now, do
     just go, Isaac—there's a lovey! 'Ee's waitin' for yer. Whatever did make yer so contrairy? Of
     course I didn't mean nothin' I said—an' I don't mind Timothy, nor nothin'.”
Still he did not move.
“Then I s'pose yer want everybody in the village to know?” he said with sarcasm.
Bessie was taken aback.
“No—I—don't—” she said undecidedly—“I don't know what yer mean.”

“You go back and tell John as I'll come when it's dark, an', if he's not a stupid, he won't
     want me to come afore.”
Bessie understood and acquiesced. She ran back with her message to John.
At half-past eight, when it had grown almost dark, Isaac descended the hill. John opened the
     door to his knock.
“Good evenin', Isaac. Yer'll take it, will yer?”
“If you can't do nothin' better with it,” said Isaac, unwillingly. “But in gineral I'm not
     partial on keeping other folk's money.”
John liked him all the better for his reluctance.
“It'll give yer no trouble,” he said. “You lock it up, an' it 'll be all safe. Now, will yer
     lend a hand?”
Isaac stepped to the door, looked up the lane, and saw that all was quiet. Then he came back,
     and the two men raised the box.
As they crossed the threshold, however, the door of the next cottage—which belonged to
     Watson, the
      policeman—opened suddenly. John, in his excitement, was so
     startled that he almost dropped his end of the box.
“Why, Bolderfield,” said Watson's cheery voice, “what have you got there? Do you want a
     hand?”
“No, I don't—thank yer kindly,” said John in agitation. “An', if you please,
     Muster Watson, don't yer say nothin' to nobody.”
The burly policeman looked from John to Isaac, then at the box. John's hoard was notorious,
     and the officer of the law understood.
“Lor' bless yer,” he said, with a laugh, “I'm safe. Well, good evenin' to yer, if I can't be
     of any assistance.”
And he went off on his beat.
The two men carried the box up the hill. It was in itself a heavy, old-fashioned affair,
     strengthened and bottomed with iron. Isaac wondered whether the weight of it were due more to
     the box or to the money. But he said nothing. He had no idea how
      much John might have saved, and would not have asked him the
     direct question for the world. John's own way of talking about his wealth was curiously
     contradictory. His “money” was rarely out of his thoughts or speech, but no one had ever been
     priviledged for many years now to see the inside of his box, except Eliza once; and no one but
     himself knew the exact amount of the hoard. It delighted him that the village gossips should
     double or treble it. Their estimates only gave him the more ground for vague boasting, and he
     would not have said a word to put them right.
When they reached the Costrells' cottage, John's first care was to examine the cupboard. He
     saw that the large wooden chest filled with odds and ends of rubbish which already stood there
     was placed on the top of his own box. Then he tried the lock, and pronounced it adequate; he
     didn't want to have Flack meddling round. Now at the moment of parting with his treasure he was
     seized with a sudden fever of secrecy. Bessie meanwhile
      hovered about the two men, full of excitement and loquacity.
     And the children, shut into the kitchen, wondered what could be the matter.
When all was done, Isaac locked the cupboard, and solemnly presented the key to John, who
     added it to the other round his neck. Then Bessie unlocked the kitchen, and set the children
     flying, to help her with the supper. She was in her most bustling and vivacious mood, and she
     had never cooked the bloaters better or provided a more ample jug of beer. But John was silent
     and depressed.
He took leave at last with many sighs and lingerings. But he had not been gone half an hour,
     and Bessie and Isaac were just going to bed, when there was a knock at the door, and he
     reappeared.
“Let me lie down there,” he said, pointing to a broken-down old sofa that ran under the
     window. “I'm lonesome somehow, an' I've told Louisa.” His white hair and whiskers stood out
     wildly round his red face. He looked old and ill, and the sympathetic Bessie was sorry for
     him.

She made him a bed on the sofa, and he lay there all night, restless, and sighing heavily. He
     missed Eliza more than he had done yet, and was oppressed with a vague sense of unhappiness.
     Once, in the middle of the night when all was still, he stole upstairs in his stockinged feet
     and gently tried the cupboard door. It was quite safe, and he went down contented.
An hour or two later he was off, trudging to Frampton through the August dawn, with his
     bundle on his back.
