
CHAPTER XIV.
In the grey of the morning, Rachel brought her father to the humble little home which he had
     voluntarily forsaken years before.
Thomas Gray was not merely a paralyzed and helpless old man, he was also destitute. Little
     more than what sufficed to cover his current expenses did Rachel find in his dwelling; his
     furniture was old and worthless; and the good-will of the business scarcely paid the arrears of
     rent.
But the world rarely gives us credit for good motives. It was currently reported that Thomas
     Gray was a wealthy man, and that if Rachel Gray did not let him go to the workhouse, she knew
     why. "As if she couldn't let him go, and keep his money too," indignantly exclaimed Jane, when
     she heard this slander; and, as discretion was not Jane's virtue, she repeated all to Rachel
     Gray. Poor Rachel coloured slightly. It seemed strange, and somewhat hard too, that her conduct
     should be judged thus. But the flush passed from her pale face, and the momentary emotion from
     her heart. "Let the world think, and say what it likes," she thought, "I need not, and I will
     not care."
Not long after Rachel brought home her father, Jane left her. The time of her apprenticeship
     was out; besides, she was going to marry. She showed more emotion on their parting, than might
     have been expected from her.
"God bless you. Miss Gray," she said several times; "God bless you—you are a good one,
     whatever the world may think."
The praise was qualified, and, perhaps, Rachel felt it to be so, for she smiled; but she took
     it as Jane meant it—kindly. Amity and peace marked their separation.
Rachel now remained alone with her father and Mary. The young girl was not observant. She saw
     but a quiet woman, and a helpless old man, with grey hair, and stern features blank of meaning,
     who sat the whole day long by the fire-side, waited on by his patient daughter. Sometimes,
     indeed, when Rachel Gray attended on her father with more than usual tenderness, when she
     lingered near his chair, looking wistfully in his face, or with timid and tender hand gently
     smoothed away his whitened hair from his rugged brow, sometimes, then, Mary looked and
     wondered, and felt vaguely moved, but she was too childish to know why.
And, indeed, the story of Rachel's life at this time cannot be told. It was beautiful; but
     its beauty was not of earth, and to earthly glance cannot be revealed. It lay, a divine secret,
     between her heart and God.
This peace was not destined to last Rachel and her father sat alone one morning in the
     parlour, when Mrs. Brown, who had found the street door ajar, burst in without preliminary
     warning. She was scarlet, and looked in a towering passion.
"You audacious creatur," she screamed; "you audacious hussey, how dare you bring that man in
     this house—in my house! How dare you?"
"He is my father," said Rachel, confounded, both at the accusation, and at the unexpected
     appearance of Mrs. Brown.
The reply exasperated Mrs. Brown. She had never felt any extraordinary friendship or
     affection for her deceased cousin; but she had always entertained a very acute sense of her
     cousin's wrongs, and had accordingly honoured Thomas Gray with no small share of hatred and
     vituperation, and that Rachel should not feel as she did on the subject, or should presume to
     remember that the sinner was her father, was, in Mrs. Brown's eyes, an offence of the deepest
     dye. She gave her feelings free vent. She was a vulgar woman, and had a flow of vulgar
     eloquence at her command. She overwhelmed Rachel and Thomas Gray with sarcasm, scorn and abuse,
     and Rachel answered not one word, but heard her out, still as a statue, and pale as death. Mrs.
     Brown, too, was pale, but it was with wrath.
"Do you know," she added, trembling from head to foot with that passion, "do you know that I
     could turn you out on the streets, you and your beggarly father—do you know that?"
Rachel did know it, and groaned inwardly. Mrs. Brown saw her agony, and triumphed in the
     consciousness of her own power. But the very violence of her anger had by this time exhausted
     it; she felt much calmer, and took a more rational view of things.
"I am a fool to mind what a simpleton like you does," observed Mrs. Brown, with that
     disregard of politeness which was one of her attributes; "for, being a simpleton, how can you
     but do the acts of a simpleton? As to bringing your father here, you must have been mad to
     think of it; for, if you can't support yourself, how can you support him? However, it's lucky
     I'm come in time to set all to rights. What's his parish? Marylebone, ain't it? I shall see the
     overseer this very day, and manage that for you; and it's just as well," added Mrs. Brown,
     divesting herself of bonnet and shawl, and proceeding to make herself at home, "that you didn't
     meddle, in it—a pretty mess you'd have made of it, I'll be bound. Well! and what do you stand
     dreaming there for? Make me a cup of tea—will you? I am just ready to drop with it all."
As a proof of her assertion, she sank on the chair next her, took out her
     pocket-handkerchief, and began fanning herself. But, instead of complying with Mrs. Brown's
     orders, Rachel Gray stood before that lady motionless and pale. She looked her in the face
     steadily, and in a firm, clear voice, she deliberately said:
"Mrs. Brown, my father shall never, whilst I live, go to a workhouse."
"What!" screamed Mrs. Brown.
"I say," repeated Rachel, "that my father shall never, whilst God gives his daughter life, go
     to a workhouse."
Mrs. Brown was confounded—then she laughed derisively.
"Nonsense, Rachel," she said, "nonsense. Why, I can turn you out, this very instant."
But the threat fell harmless, Rachel was strong in that hour; her cheek had colour, her eye
     had light, her heart had courage. She looked at the helpless old man, who had drawn this storm
     on her head, then at Mrs. Brown, and calmly laying her hand on the shoulder of Thomas Gray, she
     again looked in Mrs. Brown's face, and silently smiled. Her choice was made—her resolve was
     taken.
"Will you send him to the workhouse, or not?" imperatively cried Mrs. Brown.
"No," deliberately replied Rachel.
"Oh! very well, ma'am, very well," echoed Mrs. Brown, laughing bitterly; "please
     yourself—pray please yourself. So, that is my reward for saving you from beggary, is it? Very
     well, ma'am; you and your father may pack off together—that's all."
"Be it so," rather solemnly replied Rachel, "be it so. What I leave in this house will, I
     trust, cancel the debt I owe you. Father," she added, stooping towards him, "lean on my
     shoulder, and get up. We must go."
With apathy Thomas Gray had heard all that had passed, and with apathy, he trembling rose,
     and complied with Rachel's intimation, and looking in her face, he uttered his usual childish:
     "Never mind."
But before they reached the door, Mrs. Brown, to the surprise and dismay of Rachel, went into
     violent hysterics. She was an over-bearing and ill-tempered woman, but her heart was not wholly
     unkind; and on seeing that Rachel so readily took her at her word, she was overwhelmed with
     mingled rage and shame. Hastily making her father sit down on the nearest chair, Rachel ran to
     Mrs. Brown's assistance. A fit of weeping and bitter reproaches followed the hysterics; and
     Rachel was convicted of being the most ungrateful creature on the face of the earth. In vain
     Rachel attempted a justification; Mrs. Brown drowned her in a torrent of speech, and remained
     the most injured of women.
The scene ended as such scenes ever end. There was a compromise; the victim made every
     concession, and the triumphant tyrant gained more than her point. In short, that her father
     might not want the shelter of a roof, Rachel agreed to remain in the house, and Mrs. Brown
     kindly agreed to come and live in it, and use Rachel as her servant and domestic slave, by
     which Mrs. Brown, besides keeping her firm hold on Rachel—no slight consideration with one who
     loved power beyond everything else—effected a considerable saving in her income.
"Oh! my father—my father!" thought Rachel, as she bent over his chair that night, and tears,
     which he felt not, dropped on his gray hair, "little do you know what I shall have to bear for
     your sake."
She did not speak aloud, yet he seemed vaguely conscious that something lay on her mind; for
     he shook his head, and uttered his eternal "Never mind—never mind!"
"And I will not mind—so help me God!" fervently answered Rachel aloud.
And she did not mind; but, alas! what now was her fate? Ask it not. She had made her
     sacrifice in the spirit of utter abnegation, and none need count the cost which she never
     reckoned.
