
CHAPTER LXI
“I do not like the prospect of affairs,” said Mr. Sidney Wilton to Endymion as they were
      posting up to London from Montfort Castle; a long journey, but softened in those days by many
      luxuries, and they had much to talk about.
“The decline of the revenue is not fitful; it is regular. Our people are too apt to look at
      the state of the revenue merely in a financial point of view. If a surplus, take off taxes; if
      a deficiency, put them on. But the state of the revenue should also be considered as the index
      of the condition of the population. According to my impression, the condition of the people is
      declining; and why? because they are less employed. If this spreads, they will become
      discontented and disaffected, and I cannot help remembering that, if they become troublesome,
      it is our office that will have to deal with them.”
“This bad harvest is a great misfortune,” said Endymion.
“Yes, but a bad harvest, though unquestionably a great, perhaps the greatest, misfortune for
      this country, is not the entire solution of our difficulties—I would say, our coming
      difficulties. A bad harvest touches the whole of our commercial system: it brings us face to
      face with the corn laws. I wish our chief would give his mind to that subject. I believe a
      moderate fixed duty of about twelve shillings a quarter would satisfy every one, and nothing
      then could shake this country.”
Endymion listened with interest to other views of his master, who descanted on them at much
      length. Private secretaries know everything about their chiefs, and Endymion was not ignorant
      that among many of the great houses of the Whig party, and indeed among the bulk of what was
      called “the Liberal” party generally, Mr. Sidney Wilton was looked upon, so far as economical
      questions were concerned, as very crotchety, indeed a dangerous character. Lord Montfort was
      the only magnate who was entirely opposed to the corn laws, but then, as Berengaria would
      remark, “Simon is against all laws; he is not a practical man.”
Mr. Sidney Wilton reverted to these views more than once in the course of their journey. “I
      was not alarmed about the Chartists last year. Political trouble in this country never
      frightens me. Insurrections and riots strengthen an English government; they gave a new lease
      even to Lord Liverpool when his ministry was most feeble and unpopular; but economical
      discontent is quite another thing. The moment sedition arises from taxation, or want of
      employment, it is more dangerous and more difficult to deal with in this country than any
      other.”
“Lord Roehampton seemed to take rather a sanguine view of the situation after the
      Bed-Chamber business in the spring,” observed Endymion, rather in an inquiring than a dogmatic
      spirit.
“Lord Roehampton has other things to think of,” said Mr. Wilton. “He is absorbed, and
      naturally absorbed, in his department, the most important in the state, and of which he is
      master. But I am obliged to look at affairs nearer home. Now, this Anti-Corn-Law League, which
      they established last year at Manchester, and which begins to be very busy, though nobody at
      present talks of it, is, in my mind, a movement which ought to be watched. I tell you what; it
      occurred to me more than once during that wondrous pageant, that we have just now been taking
      part in, the government wants better information than they have as to the state of the
      country, the real feelings and condition of the bulk of the population. We used to sneer at
      the Tories for their ignorance of these matters, but after all, we, like them, are mainly
      dependent on quarter sessions; on the judgment of a lord-lieutenant and the statistics of a
      bench of magistrates. It is true we have introduced into our subordinate administration at
      Whitehall some persons who have obtained the reputation of distinguished economists, and we
      allow them to guide us. But though ingenious men, no doubt, they are chiefly bankrupt
      tradesmen, who, not having been able to manage their own affairs, have taken upon themselves
      to advise on the conduct of the country—pedants and prigs at the best, and sometimes
      impostors. No; this won’t do. It is useless to speak to the chief; I did about the
      Anti-Corn-Law League; he shrugged his shoulders and said it was a madness that would pass. I
      have made up my mind to send somebody, quite privately, to the great scenes of national
      labour. He must be somebody whom nobody knows, and nobody suspects of being connected with the
      administration, or we shall never get the truth—and the person I have fixed upon is
      yourself.”
“But am I equal to such a task?” said Endymion modestly, but sincerely.
“I think so,” said Mr. Wilton, “or, of course, I would not have fixed upon you. I want a
      fresh and virgin intelligence to observe and consider the country. It must be a mind free from
      prejudice, yet fairly informed on the great questions involved in the wealth of nations. I
      know you have read Adam Smith, and not lightly. Well, he is the best guide, though of course
      we must adapt his principles to the circumstances with which we have to deal. You have good
      judgment, great industry, a fairly quick perception, little passion—perhaps hardly enough; but
      that is probably the consequence of the sorrows and troubles of early life. But, after all,
      there is no education like adversity.”
“If it will only cease at the right time,” said Endymion.
“Well, in that respect, I do not think you have anything to complain of,” said Mr. Wilton.
      “The world is all before you, and I mistake if you do not rise. Perseverance and tact are the
      two qualities most valuable for all men who would mount, but especially for those who have to
      step out of the crowd. I am sure no one can say you are not assiduous, but I am glad always to
      observe that you have tact. Without tact you can learn nothing. Tact teaches you when to be
      silent. Inquirers who are always inquiring never learn anything.”
