
Chapter XXXII
Dr Marjoribanks was not a man to take very much notice of trivial external changes; and he
     knew Lucilla and her constitution, and, being a medical man, was not perhaps so liable to
     parental anxieties as an unprofessional father might have been; but even he was a little struck
     by Miss Marjoribanks's appearance when he came into the drawing-room. He said, "You are
     flushed, Lucilla? is anything going to happen?" with the calmness of a man who knew there was
     not much the matter—but yet he did observe that her colour was not exactly what it always was.
     "I am quite well, papa, thank you," said Lucilla, which, to be sure, was a fact the Doctor had
     never doubted; and then the people began to come in, and there was no more to be said.
But there could be no doubt that Lucilla had more colour than usual. Her pulse was quite
     steady, and her heart going on at its ordinary rate; but her admirable circulation was
     nevertheless so far affected, that the ordinary rose-tints of her complexion were all deepened.
     It was not so distinctly an improvement as it would have been had she been habitually pale; but
     still the flush was moderate, and did Miss Marjoribanks no harm. And then it was a larger party
     than usual. The Centums were there, who were General Travers's chaperons, and so were the
     Woodburns, and of course Mrs Chiley, which made up the number of ladies beyond what was general
     at Dr Marjoribanks's table. Lucilla received all her guests with the sweetest smiles and all
     her ordinary ease and self-possession, but at the same time her mind was not free from some
     excitement. She was on the eve of a crisis which would be the greatest failure or the greatest
     success of her public life, and naturally she anticipated it with a certain emotion.
Mr Cavendish, for his part, had sufficient sense to come very early, and to get into a dark
     corner and keep himself out of the way; for though he was screwed up to the emergency, his
     self-possession was nothing to that of Lucilla. But on the whole, it was perhaps Mrs Woodburn
     who suffered the most. Her heightened colour was more conspicuous than that of Miss
     Marjoribanks, because as a general rule she was pale. She was pale, almost white, and had dark
     eyes and dark hair, and possessed precisely all the accessories which make a sudden change of
     complexion remarkable; and the effect this evening was so evident that even her husband admired
     her for a moment, and then stopped short to inquire, "By George! had she begun to paint?" to
     which question Mrs Woodburn naturally replied only by an indignant shrug of her white shoulders
     and aversion of her head. She would not have been sorry, perhaps, for this night only, if he
     had believed that it was rouge, and not emotion. Of all the people at Dr Marjoribanks's table,
     she perhaps was the only one really to be pitied. Even Mr Cavendish, if vanquished, would at
     the most receive only the recompense of his deeds, and could go away and begin over again
     somewhere else, or bury himself in the great depths of general society, where nobody would be
     the wiser; but as for his sister, she could not go away. The first result for her would be to
     give the master to whom she belonged, and for whom she had, with some affection, a great deal
     of not unnatural contempt, a cruel and overwhelming power over her; and she knew, poor soul,
     that he was not at all too generous or delicate to make use of such a power. In such a case she
     would be bound to the rock, like a kind of hapless Andromeda, to be pecked at by all the birds
     and blown at by all the winds, not to speak of the devouring monster from whom no hero could
     ever deliver her; and with all these horrible consequences before her eyes, she had to sit
     still and look on and do nothing, to see all the hidden meaning of every look and movement
     without appearing to see it, to maintain ordinary conversation when her ear was strained to the
     uttermost to hear words of fate on which her whole future depended. No wonder her colour was
     high; and she could not go into a corner, as Mr Cavendish did, nor keep silent, nor withdraw
     herself from observation. Neither her pulse nor her heart would have borne the scrutiny to
     which Miss Marjoribanks's calm organs might have been subjected with perfect security; and the
     chances are, if the Doctor had by any hazard put his finger on her wrist when he shook hands
     with her, that instead of handing her over to General Travers to be taken down to dinner, he
     would have, on the contrary, sent her off to bed.
Fortunately by this time the year was declining, and that happy season had returned in which
     people once more begin to dine by artificial light; and at the same time it was not absolutely
     dark in the drawing-room, so that Lucilla had not, as she said, thought it necessary to have
     the candles lighted. "If there should happen to be a mistake as to who is to take down who, it
     will only be all the more amusing," said Miss Marjoribanks, "so long as you do not go off and
     leave me." This was addressed to the Archdeacon, to whom Lucilla was very particular
     in her attentions at that moment. Mrs Chiley, who was looking on with a great sense of
     depression, could not help wondering why—"When she knows he is engaged and everything settled,"
     the old lady said to herself, with natural indignation. For her part, she did not see what
     right a man had to introduce himself thus under false pretences into the confiding bosom of
     society—when he was as bad as married, or even indeed worse. She was ruffled, and she did not
     think it worth while to conceal that she was so; for there are limits to human patience, and a
     visitor who stays six weeks ought at least to have confidence in his entertainers. Mrs Chiley
     for once in her life could have boxed Lucilla's ears for her uncalled-for civility. "I think it
     very strange that it is not the General who takes her downstairs," she said to Mrs Centum. "It
     is all very well to have a respect for clergymen; but after being here so often, and the
     General quite a stranger—I am surprised at Lucilla," said the indiscreet old lady. As for Mrs
     Centum, she felt the neglect, but she had too much proper pride to own that her man was not
     receiving due attention. "It is not the first time General Travers has been here," she said,
     reserving the question; and so in the uncertain light, when nobody was sure who was his
     neighbour, the procession filed downstairs.
To enter the dining-room, all brilliant and shining as it was, radiant with light and flowers
     and crystal and silver, and everything that makes a dinner-table pretty to look upon, was, as
     Mrs Centum said, "quite a contrast." A close observer might have remarked, as Mrs Woodburn and
     Lucilla took their places, that both of them, instead of that flush which had been so
     noticeable a short time before, had become quite pale. It was the moment of trial. Poor Mr
     Cavendish, in his excitement, had taken just the place he ought not to have taken, immediately
     under the lamp at the centre of the table. During the moment when the unsuspecting Archdeacon
     said grace with his eyes decorously cast down, Miss Marjoribanks owned the ordinary weakness of
     humanity so much as to drop her fan and her handkerchief, and even the napkin which was
     arranged in a symmetrical pyramid on her plate. Such a sign of human feebleness could but
     endear her to everybody who was aware of the momentous character of the crisis. When these were
     all happily recovered and everybody seated, Lucilla kept her eyes fixed upon the Archdeacon's
     face. It was, as we have said, a terrible moment. When he raised his head and looked round him,
     naturally Mr Beverley's eyes went direct to the mark like an arrow; he looked, and he saw at
     the centre of the table, surrounded by every kind of regard and consideration, full in the
     light of the lamp, his favourite adventurer, the impostor whom he had denounced the first time
     he took his place by Miss Marjoribanks's side. The Archdeacon rose to his feet in the
     excitement of the discovery; he put his hand over his eyes as if to clear them. He said, "Good
     God!" loud out, with an accent of horror which paralysed the two people lower down than
     himself. As for Miss Marjoribanks, she was not paralysed—she who had not lost a single glance
     of his eyes or movement of his large person. Lucilla rose to the height of the position. She
     put her hand upon his arm sharply, and with a certain energy. "Mr Beverley, Thomas is behind
     you with the soup," said Miss Marjoribanks. The Archdeacon turned round to see what it was,
     conscious that somebody had spoken to him, but as indifferent to his companion and to civility
     as he was to Thomas and the soup. "What?" he said hoarsely, interrupting his scrutiny for the
     moment. But when he had met Miss Marjoribanks's eye the Archdeacon sat down. Lucilla did not
     liberate him for a moment from that gaze. She fixed her eyes upon his eyes, and looked at him
     as people only look when they mean something. "If you tell me what surprised you so much,
     perhaps I can explain," said Miss Marjoribanks. She spoke so that nobody could hear but
     himself; and in the meantime General Travers at her left hand was making himself excessively
     agreeable to Mrs Woodburn, and no doubt occupying all her attention; and Lucilla never turned
     her eyes for a moment from the Archdeacon's face.
"I beg your pardon," said Mr Beverley. "I was confounded by what I saw. Good heavens! it is
     not possible I can deceive myself. I understand your alarm. I am not going to make a
     disturbance and break up your party. I can wait," the Archdeacon said, drawing a rapid forcible
     breath. "Miss Marjoribanks, do you know who that man is?"
"Oh, yes," said Lucilla, softening into a smile. "Perfectly, I assure you. He is one of
     papa's guests, and very much respected in Carlingford; and he is one of my—very particular
     friends," Miss Marjoribanks added. She laughed as she spoke, a kind of laugh which is only
     appropriate to one subject, and which is as good, any day, as a confession; and the flush was
     so obliging as to return at that moment to her ingenuous countenance. "We have known each other
     a long time," Lucilla went on after that pretty pause; and then she raised her confiding eyes,
     which had been cast down, once more to the Archdeacon's face. "You can't think how nice he is,
     Mr Beverley," said Miss Marjoribanks. She clasped her hands together, just for a moment, as she
     did so, with an eloquent meaning which it was impossible to mistake. The Archdeacon, for his
     part, gazed at her like a man in a dream. Whether it was true—or whether he was being made a
     fool of more completely than ever man before was—or whether he was the victim of an optical or
     some other kind of delusion,—the poor man could not tell. He was utterly stricken dumb, and did
     not know what to say. He accepted the soup humbly, which Thomas set before him, though it was a
     white soup, an effeminate dish, which went utterly in the face of his principles. And then he
     looked at the innocent young creature at his side in that flutter of happy confusion. It was a
     terrible position for the Broad-Churchman. After such a tacit confession he could not spring
     from his seat and hurl the impostor out of the room, as in the first place he had a mind to do.
     On the contrary, it was with a voice trembling with emotion that he spoke.
"My dear Miss Marjoribanks," said the Archdeacon, "I am struck dumb by what you tell me. Good
     heavens! that it should have come to this; and yet I should be neglecting my duty if I kept
     silent. You do not—you cannot know who he is."
"Oh, yes," said Lucilla, with another little laugh—"everything—and how he used to
     know Mrs Mortimer, and all about it. He has no secrets from me," said Miss Marjoribanks. She
     caught Mr Cavendish's eye at the moment, who was casting a stealthy glance in her direction,
     and who looked cowed and silenced and unquiet to the most miserable degree; and she gave him a
     little reassuring nod, which the Archdeacon watched with an inward groan. What was he to do? He
     could not publicly expose the man who had just received this mark of confidence from his young
     hostess, who knew everything. Perhaps it was one of the greatest trials of Christian patience
     and fortitude which the Archdeacon, who was not great, as he himself would have said, in the
     passive virtues, had undergone in all the course of his life. He was so utterly subdued and
     confounded that he ate his soup, and never found out what kind of soup it was. That is, he
     consumed it in large spoonfuls without being aware, by way of occupying his energies and
     filling up the time.
"You cannot mean it," he said, after a pause. "You must be imperfectly informed. At least let
     me talk to your father. You must hear all the rights of the story. If you will let me speak
     half a dozen words to—to that person, Miss Marjoribanks, I am sure he will leave the place; he
     will give up any claim——"
"Oh, yes, please talk to him," said Miss Marjoribanks, "it will be so nice to see you
     friends. Nothing would make me so happy. You know I have heard all about it from you and from
     Mrs Mortimer already, so I am sure there cannot be much more to tell; and as for papa, he is
     very fond of Mr Cavendish," said Lucilla, with an imperceptible elevation of her voice.
"Is it he whom you call Mr Cavendish?" said the Archdeacon. He too had raised his
     voice without knowing it, and several people looked up, who were not at the moment engaged in
     active conversation of their own. The owner of that name, for his part, also turned his face
     towards the upper end of the table. He was sick of the suspense and continued endurance, and by
     this time was ready to rush upon his fate.
"Did any one call me?" he said; and there was a little pause, and the company in general
     fixed its regard upon those three people with a sense that something remarkable was going on
     among them, though it could not tell what or why.
"The Archdeacon wants to make your acquaintance," said Miss Marjoribanks. "Mr Cavendish—Mr
     Beverley. There, you know each other; and when we are gone you can talk to each other if you
     like," Lucilla added; "but in the meantime you are too far off, and I want
     the Archdeacon. He is so much liked in Carlingford," she continued, lowering her
     voice. "You can't think how glad we are to have him back again. I am sure if you only knew him
     better——" said Miss Marjoribanks. As for the Archdeacon, words could not give any idea of the
     state of his mind. He ate his dinner sternly after that, and did not look at anything but his
     plate. He consumed the most exquisite plats, the tenderest wings of chicken and
     morsels of paté, as if they had been his personal enemies. For, to tell the truth, he
     felt the tables altogether turned upon him, and was confounded, and did not know what it could
     mean.
It was the General who took up Mr Beverley's abandoned place in the conversation. The gallant
     soldier talked for two with the best will in the world. He talked of Cavendish, and all the
     pleasant hours they had spent together, and what a good fellow he was, and how much the men in
     the club would be amused to hear of his domesticity. It was a kind of talk very natural to a
     man who found himself placed at table between his friend's sister, and, as he supposed, his
     friend's future bride. And naturally the Archdeacon got all the benefit. As for Lucilla, she
     received it with the most perfect grace in the world and saw all the delicate points of the
     General's wit, and appreciated him so thoroughly, that he felt half inclined to envy Cavendish.
     "By Jove! he is the luckiest fellow I know," General Travers said; and probably it was the
     charms of his intelligent and animated conversation that kept the ladies so long at table. Mrs
     Chiley, for her part, did not know what to make of it. She said afterwards that she kept
     looking at Lucilla until she was really quite ashamed; and though she was at the other end of
     the table, she could see that the poor dear did not enjoy her dinner. It happened, too, that
     when they did move at last, the drawing-room was fuller than usual. Everybody had come that
     evening—Sir John, and some others of the county people, who only came now and then, and without
     any exception everybody in Carlingford. And Lucilla certainly was not herself for the
     first half-hour. She kept close to the door, and regarded the staircase with an anxious
     countenance. When she was herself at the helm of affairs, there was a certain security that
     everything would go on tolerably—but nobody could tell what a set of men left to themselves
     might or might not do. This was the most dreadful moment of the evening. Mrs Mortimer was in
     the drawing-room, hidden away under the curtains of a window, knowing nobody, speaking to
     nobody, and in a state of mind to commit suicide with pleasure; but Miss Marjoribanks, though
     she had cajoled her into that martyrdom, took no notice of Mrs Mortimer. She was civil, it is
     true, to her other guests, but there could not be a doubt that Lucilla was horribly
     preoccupied, and in a state of mind quite unusual to her. "I am sure she is not well," Mrs
     Chiley said, who was watching her from afar. "I saw that she did not eat any dinner"—and the
     kind old lady got up slowly and extricated herself from the crowd, and put herself in motion as
     best she could, to go to her young friend's aid.
It was at this moment that Lucilla turned round radiant upon the observant assembly. The
     change occurred in less than a moment, so suddenly that nobody saw the actual point of
     revolution. Miss Marjoribanks turned round upon the company and took Mr Cavendish's arm, who
     had just come upstairs. "There is a very, very old friend of yours in the corner who wants to
     see you," said Lucilla; and she led him across the room as a conqueror might have led a
     captive. She took him through the crowd, to whom she dispensed on every side her most gracious
     glances. "I am coming directly," Miss Marjoribanks said—for naturally she was called on all
     sides. What most people remarked at this moment was, that the Archdeacon, who had also come in
     with the other gentlemen, was standing very sullen and lowering at the door, watching that
     triumphal progress. And it certainly was not Lucilla's fault if Mrs Chiley and Lady Richmond,
     and a few other ladies, were thus led to form a false idea of the state of affairs. "I suppose
     it is all right between them at last," Lady Richmond said, not thinking that Barbara Lake was
     standing by and heard her. According to appearances, it was all perfectly right between them.
     Miss Marjoribanks, triumphant, led Mr Cavendish all the length of the room to the corner where
     the widow sat among the curtains, and the Archdeacon looked on with a visible passion, and
     jealous rage, which were highly improper in a clergyman, but yet which were exciting to see.
     And this was how the little drama was to conclude, according to Lady Richmond and Mrs Chiley,
     who, on the whole, were satisfied with the conclusion. But, naturally, there were other people
     to be consulted. There was Mr Beverley, whom Miss Marjoribanks held in leash, but who was not
     yet subdued; and there was Dr Marjoribanks, who began to feel a little curiosity about his
     daughter's movements, and did not make them out; and there was Barbara Lake, who had begun to
     blaze like a tempest with her crimson cheeks and black bold eyes. But by this time Lucilla was
     herself again, and felt the reins in her hands. When she had deposited Mr Cavendish in safety,
     she faced round upon the malcontents and upon the observers, and on the world in general. Now
     that her mind was at rest, and everything under her own inspection, she felt herself ready and
     able for all.
