
Chapter XXXVIII
Life with most people is little more than a succession of high and low tides. There are times
     when the stream runs low, and when there is nothing to be seen but the dull sandbanks, or even
     mud-banks, for months, or even years together; and then all at once the waters swell, and come
     rushing twice a day like the sea, carrying life and movement with them. Miss Marjoribanks had
     been subject to the eaux mortes for a long time: but now the spring-tides had rushed
     back. A day or two after Mr Ashburton had been revealed to her as the predestined member,
     something occurred, not in itself exciting, but which was not without its ultimate weight upon
     the course of affairs. It was the day when Aunt Jemima was expected in Grange Lane. She was
     Aunt Jemima to Lucilla; but the Doctor called her Mrs John, and was never known to address her
     by any more familiar title. She was, as she herself described it, a widow lady, and wore the
     dress of her order, and was the mother of Tom Marjoribanks. She was not a frequent visitor at
     Carlingford, for she and her brother-in-law had various points on which they were not of
     accord. The Doctor, for his part, could not but feel perennially injured that the boy had
     fallen to the lot of Mrs John, while he had only a girl—even though that girl was Lucilla; and
     Aunt Jemima could not forgive him for the rude way in which he treated her health, which was so
     delicate, and his want of sympathy for many other people who were delicate too. Even when she
     arrived, and was being entertained with the usual cup of tea, fears of her brother-in-law's
     robustness and unsympathetic ways had begun to overpower her. "I hope your papa does not ask
     too much from you, Lucilla," she said, as she sat in her easy-chair, and took her tea by the
     fire in the cosy room which had been prepared for her. "I hope he does not make you do too
     much, for I am sure you are not strong, my dear. Your poor mamma, you know——" and Mrs John
     looked with a certain pathos at her niece, as though she saw signs of evil in Lucilla's fresh
     complexion and substantial frame.
"I am pretty well, thank you, Aunt Jemima," said Miss Marjoribanks, "and papa lets me do
     pretty much what I like: I am too old now, you know, to be told what to do."
"Don't call yourself old, my dear," said Aunt Jemima, with a passing gleam of worldly
     wisdom—"one gets old quite soon enough. Are you subject to headaches, Lucilla, or pains in the
     limbs? Your poor mamma——"
"Dear Aunt Jemima, I am as well as ever I can be," said Miss Marjoribanks. "Tell me when you
     heard from Tom, and what he is doing. Let me see, it is ten years since he went away. I used to
     write to him, but he did not answer my letters—not as he ought, you know. I suppose he has
     found friends among the Calcutta ladies," said Lucilla, with a slight but not unapparent
     sigh.
"He never says anything to me about Calcutta ladies," said Tom's mother; "to tell the truth,
     I always thought before he went away that he was fond of you—I must have been
     mistaken, as he never said anything; and that was very fortunate at all events."
"I am sure I am very thankful he was not fond of me," said Lucilla, with a little natural
     irritation, "for I never could have returned it. But I should like to know why that was so
     fortunate. I can't see that it would have been such a very bad thing for him, for my part."
"Yes, my dear," said Aunt Jemima, placidly, "it would have been a very bad thing; for you
     know, Lucilla, though you get on very nicely here, you never could have done for a poor man's
     wife."
Miss Marjoribanks's bosom swelled when she heard these words—it swelled with that profound
     sense of being unappreciated and misunderstood, which is one of the hardest trials in the way
     of genius; but naturally she was not going to let her aunt see her mortification. "I don't mean
     to be any man's wife just now," she said, making a gulp of it—"I am too busy electioneering; we
     are going to have a new member in dear old Mr Chiltern's place. Perhaps he will come in this
     evening to talk things over, and you shall see him," Lucilla added, graciously. She was a
     little excited about the candidate, as was not unnatural—more excited, perhaps, than she would
     have been ten years ago, when life was young; and then it was not to be expected that she could
     be pleased with Aunt Jemima for thinking it was so fortunate; though even that touch of wounded
     pride did not lead Miss Marjoribanks to glorify herself by betraying Tom.
"My brother-in-law used to be a dreadful Radical," said Aunt Jemima; "I hope it is not one of
     those revolutionary men; I have seen your poor uncle sit up arguing with him till I thought
     they never would be done. If that is the kind of thing, I hope you will not associate yourself
     with it, Lucilla. Your papa should have more sense than to let you. I should never have
     permitted it if you had been my daughter," added Mrs John, with a little heat—for, to
     tell the truth, she too felt a slight vexation on her part that the Doctor had the girl—even
     though not for twenty girls would she have given up Tom.
Miss Marjoribanks looked upon the weak woman who thus ventured to address her with
     indescribable feelings; but after all she was not so much angry as amused and compassionate.
     She could not help thinking to herself, if she had been Mrs John's daughter, how perfectly
     docile Aunt Jemima would have been by this time, and how little she would have really ventured
     to interfere. "It would have been very nice," she said, with a meditative realisation of the
     possibility—"though it is very odd to think how one could have been one's own cousin—I should
     have taken very good care of you, I am sure."
"You would have done no such thing," said Mrs John; "you would have gone off and married; I
     know how girls do. You have not married now, because you have been too comfortable, Lucilla.
     You have had everything your own way, and all that you wanted, without any of the bother. It is
     very strange how differently people's lots are ordered. I was married at seventeen—and I am
     sure I have not known what it was to have a day's health——"
"Dear Aunt Jemima!" said her affectionate niece, kissing her, "but papa shall see if he
     cannot give you something, and we will take such care of you while you are here."
Mrs John was softened in spite of herself; but still she shook her head. "It is very nice of
     you to say so, my dear," she said, "and it's pleasant to feel that one has somebody belonging
     to one; but I have not much confidence in your papa. He never understood my complaints. I used
     to be very sorry for your poor mamma. He never showed that sympathy—but I did not mean to blame
     him to you, Lucilla. I am sure he is a very good father to you."
"He has been a perfect old angel," said Miss Marjoribanks; and then the conversation came to
     a pause, as it was time to dress for dinner. Mrs John Marjoribanks had a very nice room, and
     everything that was adapted to make her comfortable; but she too had something to think of when
     the door closed upon Lucilla, and she was left with her maid and her hot water and her black
     velvet gown. Perhaps it was a little inconsistent to wear a black velvet gown with her widow's
     cap; it was a question which she had long debated in her mind before she resigned herself to
     the temptation—but then it always looked so well, and was so very profitable! and Mrs John felt
     that it was incumbent upon her to keep up a respectable appearance for Tom's sake. Tom was very
     much in her mind at that moment, as indeed he always was; for though it was a long time ago,
     she could not get the idea out of her head that he must have said something to Lucilla before
     he went off to India; and he had a way of asking about his cousin in his letters; and though
     she would have done anything to secure her boy's happiness, and was on the whole rather fond of
     her niece, yet the idea of the objections her brother-in-law would have to such a match,
     excited to the uttermost the smouldering pride which existed in Aunt Jemima's heart. He was
     better off, and had always been better off, than her poor John—and he had robust health and an
     awful scorn of the coddling, to which, as he said, she had subjected his brother; and he had
     money enough to keep his child luxuriously, and make her the leader of Carlingford
     society, while her poor boy had to go to India and put himself in the way of all kinds
     of unknown diseases and troubles. Mrs John was profoundly anxious to promote her son's
     happiness, and would gladly have given every penny she had to get him married to Lucilla, "if
     that was what he wanted," as she justly said; but to have her brother-in-law object to him, and
     suggest that he was not good enough, was the one thing she could not bear. She was thinking
     about this, and whether Tom really had not said anything, and whether Lucilla cared for him,
     and what amid all these perplexities she should do, while she dressed for dinner; and, at the
     same time, she felt her palpitation worse than usual, and knew Dr Marjoribanks would smile his
     grim smile if she complained, so that her visit to Grange Lane, though Lucilla meant to take
     good care of her, was not altogether unmingled delight to Mrs John.
But, nevertheless, Dr Marjoribanks's dinner-table was always a cheerful sight, even when it
     was only a dinner-party of three; for then naturally they used the round table, and were as
     snug as possible. Lucilla wore her knot of green and violet ribbons on her white dress, to her
     aunt's great amazement, and the Doctor had all the air of a man who had been out in the world
     all day and returned in the evening with something to tell—which is a thing which gives great
     animation to a family party. Mrs John Marjoribanks had been out of all that sort of thing for a
     long time. She had been living quite alone in a widowed, forlorn way, and had half forgotten
     how pleasant it was to have somebody coming in with a breath of fresh air about him and the
     day's budget of news—and it had an animating effect upon her, even though she was not fond of
     her brother-in-law. Dr Marjoribanks inquired about Tom in the most fatherly way, and what he
     was about, and how things were looking for him, and whether he intended to come home. "Much
     better not," the Doctor said,—"I should certainly advise him not, if he asked me. He has got
     over all the worst of it, and now is his time to do something worth while."
"Tom is not one to think merely of worldly advantages," said his mother, with a fine instinct
     of opposition. "I don't think he would care to waste all the best part of his life making
     money. I'd rather see him come home and be happy, for my part, even if he were not so
     rich——"
"If all men were happy that came home," said the Doctor, and then he gave a rather grim
     chuckle. "Somebody has come home that you did not reckon on, Lucilla. I am sorry to spoil
     sport; but I don't see how you are to get out of it. There is another address on the walls
     to-day besides that one of yours——"
"Oh, I hope there will be six addresses!" cried Miss Marjoribanks; "if we had it all our own
     way it would be no fun;—a Tory, and a Whig, and a—did you say Radical, Aunt Jemima? And then,
     what is a Conservative?" asked Lucilla, though certainly she had a very much better notion of
     political matters than Aunt Jemima had, to say the least.
"I wonder how you can encourage any poor man to go into Parliament," said Mrs John; "so
     trying for the health as it must be, and an end to everything like domestic life. If it was my
     Tom I would almost rather he stayed in India. He looks strong, but there is never any
     confidence to be put in young men looking strong. Oh, I know you do not agree with me, Doctor;
     but I have had sad reason for my way of thinking," said the poor lady. As for the Doctor, he
     did not accept the challenge thus thrown to him. Tom Marjoribanks was not the foremost figure
     in the world in his eyes, as the absent wanderer was in that of his mother; and he had not yet
     unburdened himself of what he had to say.
"I am not saying anything in favour of going into Parliament," said the Doctor. "I'd sooner
     be a barge-man on the canal, if it was me. I am only telling Lucilla what she has before her. I
     don't know when I have been more surprised. Of course you were not looking for that,"
     said Dr Marjoribanks. He had kept back until the things were taken off the table, for he had a
     benevolent disinclination to spoil anybody's dinner. Now, when all the serious part of the meal
     was over, he tossed the Carlingford Gazette across the table, folded so that she could
     not miss what he wanted her to see. Lucilla took it up lightly between her finger and thumb;
     for the Carlingford papers were inky and badly printed, and soiled a lady's hand. She took it
     up delicately without either alarm or surprise, knowing very well that the Blues and the
     Yellows were not likely without a struggle to give up to the new standard, which was violet and
     green. But what she saw on that inky broadsheet overwhelmed in an instant Miss Marjoribanks's
     self-possession. She turned pale, though her complexion was, if possible, fresher than ever,
     and even shivered in her chair, though her nerves were so steady. Could it be a trick to thwart
     and startle her? or could it be true? She lifted her eyes to her father with a look of
     horror-stricken inquiry, but all that she met in return was a certain air of amusement and
     triumph, which struck her at the tenderest point. He was not sorry nor sympathetic, nor did he
     care at all for the sudden shock she had sustained. On the contrary, he was laughing within
     himself at the utterly unexpected complication. It was cruel, but it was salutary, and restored
     her self-command in a moment. She might have given way under kindness, but this look of
     satisfaction over her discomfiture brought Lucilla to herself.
"Yes, I thought you would be surprised," said Dr Marjoribanks dryly; and he took his first
     glass of claret with a slow relish and enjoyment, which roused every sentiment of self-respect
     and spark of temper existing in his daughter's mind. "If you had kept your own place it would
     not have mattered; but I don't see how you are to get out of it. You see young ladies should
     let these sort of things alone, Lucilla." This was all the feeling he showed for her in her
     unexpected dilemma. Miss Marjoribanks's heart gave one throb, which made the green and violet
     ribbons jump and thrill; and then she came to herself, and recognised, as she had so often done
     before, that she had to fight her way by herself, and had nobody to look to. Such a thought is
     dreary enough sometimes, and there are minds that sink under it; but at other times it is like
     the touch of the mother earth which gave the giant back its strength; and Lucilla was of the
     latter class of intelligence. When she saw the triumph with which her embarrassment was
     received and that she had no sympathy nor aid to look for, she recovered herself as if by
     magic. Let what would come in the way, nothing could alter her certainty that Mr Ashburton was
     the man for Carlingford; and that determination not to be beaten, which is the soul of British
     valour, sprang up in an instant in Miss Marjoribanks's mind. There was not even the alternative
     of victory or Westminster Abbey for Lucilla. If she was ever to hold up her head again, or have
     any real respect for herself, she must win. All this passed through her head in the one
     bewildering moment, while her father's words were still making her ears tingle, and that
      name, printed in big inky letters, seemed to flutter in all the air round her. It was
     hard to believe the intelligence thus conveyed, and harder still to go on in the face of old
     friendships and the traditions of her youth; but still duty was dearer than tradition, and it
     was now a necessity to fight the battle to the last, and at all risks to win.
"Thank you all the same, papa, for bringing me the paper," said Lucilla. "It would have been
     a great deal worse if I had not known of it before I saw him. I am sure I am very glad for one
     thing. He can't be married or dead, as people used to say. I am quite ashamed to keep you so
     long downstairs, Aunt Jemima, when I know you must be longing for a cup of tea—but it is
     somebody come back whom nobody expected. Tell him I shall be so glad to see him, papa;
     though I have no reason to be glad, for he was one of my young friends, you know, and
     he is sure to think I have gone off." As she spoke, Lucilla turned Aunt Jemima, to whom she had
     given her arm, quite round, that she might look into the great glass over the mantelpiece: "I
     don't think I am quite so much gone off as I expected to be," said Miss Marjoribanks,
     with candid impartiality; "though of course he will think me stouter—but it does not make any
     difference about Mr Ashburton being the right man for Carlingford." She said the words with a
     certain solemnity, and turned Mrs John, who was so much surprised as to be speechless, round
     again, and led her upstairs. It was as if they were walking in a procession of those martyrs
     and renouncers of self, who build up the foundations of society; and it would not be too much
     to say that under her present circumstances, and in the excitement of this singular and
     unexpected event, such was the painful but sublime consciousness which animated Lucilla's
     breast.
As for Dr Marjoribanks, his triumph was taken out of him by that spectacle. He closed the
     door after the ladies had gone, and came back to his easy-chair by the side of the fire, and
     could not but feel that he had had the worst of it. It was actually Mr Cavendish who had come
     home, and whose address to the electors of Carlingford, dated from Dover on his return to
     England, the Doctor had just put into his daughter's hand. But wonderful and unlooked-for as
     was the event, Lucilla, though taken unawares, had not given in, nor shown any signs of
     weakness. And the effect upon her father of her last utterance and confession was such that he
     took up the paper again and read both addresses, which were printed side by side. In other days
     Mr Cavendish had been the chosen candidate of Grange Lane; and the views which he expressed
     (and he expressed his views very freely) were precisely those of Dr Marjoribanks. Yet when the
     Doctor turned to Mr Ashburton's expression of his conviction that he was the right man for
     Carlingford, it cannot be denied that the force of that simple statement had a wonderful effect
     upon his mind—an effect all the greater, perhaps, in comparison with the political exposition
     made by the other unexpected candidate. The Doctor's meditations possibly took a slumbrous tone
     from the place and the moment at which he pursued them; for the fact was that the words he had
     just been hearing ran in his head all through the reading of the two addresses. Mr Cavendish
     would think Lucilla had gone off; but yet she had not gone off so much as might have been
     expected, and Mr Ashburton was the man for Carlingford. Dr Marjoribanks laughed quietly by
     himself in his easy-chair, and then went back to Mr Cavendish's opinions; and ended again,
     without knowing it, in a kind of odd incipient agreement with Lucilla. The new candidate was
     right in politics; but, after all, Mr Ashburton was a more satisfactory sort of person. He was
     a man whom people knew everything about, and a descendant of old Penrhyn, and had the Firs, and
     lived in it, and spent about so much money every year honestly in the face of the world. When a
     man conducts himself in this way, his neighbours can afford to be less exacting as to his
     political opinions. This comparison went on in the Doctor's thoughts until the distinction
     between the two grew confused and faint in that ruddy and genial glow of firelight and
     lamplight and personal well-being which is apt to engross a man's mind after he has come in out
     of the air, as people say, and has eaten a good dinner, and feels himself comfortable; and at
     last all that remained in Dr Marjoribanks's mind was that Mr Cavendish would think Lucilla had
     gone off, though she had not gone off nearly so much as might have been expected; at which he
     laughed with an odd sound, which roused him, and might have induced some people to think he had
     been sleeping—if, indeed, anybody had been near to hear.
But this news was naturally much more serious to Miss Marjoribanks when she got upstairs, and
     had time to think of it. She would not have been human if she had heard without emotion of the
     return of the man whom she had once dreamed of as member for Carlingford, with the addition of
     other dreams which had not been altogether without their sweetness. He had returned now and
     then for a few days, but Lucilla knew that he had never held up his head in Grange Lane since
     the day when she advised him to marry Barbara Lake. And now when he had bethought himself of
     his old ambition, had he possibly bethought himself of other hopes as well? And the horrible
     thing was, that she had pledged herself to another, and put her seal upon it that Mr Ashburton
     was the man for Carlingford! It may be supposed that, with such a complication in her mind,
     Miss Marjoribanks was very little capable of supporting Aunt Jemima's questions as to what it
     was about, and who was Mr Cavendish, and why was his return of consequence to Lucilla? Mrs John
     was considerably alarmed and startled, and began to think in earnest that Tom was fond of his
     cousin, and would never forgive his mother for letting Lucilla perhaps marry some one else, and
     settle down before her very eyes.
"If it is a very particular friend, I can understand it," Mrs John said, with a little
     asperity; but that was after she had made a great many attempts, which were only partially
     successful, to find it all out.
"Dear Aunt Jemima," said Lucilla, "we are all particular friends in Carlingford—society is so
     limited, you know;—and Mr Cavendish has been a very long time away. He used to be of such use
     to me, and I am so fond of him," Miss Marjoribanks said, with a sigh; and it may be supposed
     that Mrs John's curiosity was not lessened by such a response.
"If you are engaged to any one, Lucilla, I must say I think I ought to have been told," said
     Tom's mother, with natural indignation. "Though I ought not to blame you for it,
     perhaps. It is a sad thing when a girl is deprived of a mother's care; but still I am your
     nearest relation——"
"My dear aunt, it is something about the election," said Miss Marjoribanks. "How could I be
     engaged to a man who has been away ten years?"
"Tom has been away ten years," said Mrs John impetuously; and then she blushed, though she
     was past the age of blushing, and made haste to cover her imprudence. "I don't see what you can
     have to do with the election," she said, with suspicion, but some justice; "and I don't feel,
     Lucilla, as if you were telling me all."
"I have the favours to make, Aunt Jemima," said Lucilla—"green and violet. You used to be so
     clever at making bows, and I hope you will help me;—papa, you know, will have to be on Mr
     Ashburton's committee," Miss Marjoribanks added; and then, in spite of herself, a sigh of doubt
     and anxiety escaped her bosom. It was easy to say that "papa would be on Mr Ashburton's
     committee, you know," but nobody had known that Mr Cavendish was coming to drive everything
     topsy-turvy; and Lucilla, though she professed to know only who was the man for Carlingford,
     had at the same time sufficient political information to be aware that the sentiments
     propounded in Mr Cavendish's address were also Dr Marjoribanks's sentiments; and she did not
     know the tricks which some green-and-violet spirit in the dining-room was playing with the
     Doctor's fancy. Perhaps it might turn out to be Mr Cavendish's committee which her father would
     be on; and after she had pledged herself that the other man was the man for Carlingford!
     Lucilla felt that she could not be disloyal and go back from her word, neither could she forget
     the intimation which had so plainly indicated to her that Mr Ashburton was the man; and yet, at
     the same time, she could not but sigh as she thought of Mr Cavendish. Perhaps he had grown
     coarse, as men do at that age, just as Lucilla herself was conscious that he would find her
     stouter. Perhaps he had ceased to flirt, or be of any particular use of an evening; possibly
     even he might have forgotten Miss Marjoribanks—but naturally that was a thing that seemed
     unlikely to Lucilla. And oh! if he had but come a little earlier, or for ever stayed away!
But while all these thoughts were going through her mind, her fingers were still busy with
     the violet-and-green cockades which Aunt Jemima, after making sure that Mr Ashburton was not a
     Radical, had begun to help her with. And they sat and talked about Mrs John's breathing, which
     was so bad, and about her headaches, while Lucilla by snatches discussed the situation in her
     mind. Perhaps, on the whole, embarrassment and perplexity are a kind of natural accompaniment
     to life and movement; and it is better to be driven out of your senses with thinking which of
     two things you ought to do than to do nothing whatever, and be utterly uninteresting to all the
     world. This at least was how Lucilla reasoned to herself in her dilemma; and while she reasoned
     she used up yard upon yard of her green ribbon (for naturally the violet bore but a small
     proportion to the green). Whatever she might have to do or to suffer—however her thoughts might
     be disturbed or her heart distracted—it is unnecessary to add that it was impossible to Lucilla
     either to betray or to yield.
