
Chapter XXIV
It was the most unlucky moment for the weather to change, being the middle of July, and as
     near as possible to St Swithin's Day; but the season had been so delightful up to that time
     that nobody in Carlingford at least had any reason to complain. So far as Miss Marjoribanks was
     concerned, she was rather glad, on the whole, that the next day was wet, and that she could not
     go out all the morning, nor was likely to be interrupted by visitors. She had all her plans to
     settle and mature for the great enterprise which she had taken in hand. By this time, so far
     from feeling any personal interest in the Archdeacon, or considering herself injured by his
     sudden desertion, that little episode had gone out of Lucilla's mind as completely as if it had
     never been. In one point, however, Miss Marjoribanks's conviction remained firm; it was
     impressed upon her mind that Carlingford would not be made into a bishopric, or, if made into a
     bishopric, that it was not Mr Beverley who would be chosen to occupy the new see. It was one of
     those instinctive certainties which are not capable of explanation, which was thus borne in
     upon her spirit, and she could not have felt more sure of it had she seen it under the Queen's
     own hand and seal. While she went about her usual morning occupations, her mind was full of her
     great and novel undertaking. Mr Beverley was not a man to be revolutionised in a moment; and
     many people would have shrunk from the attempt to work in a few days or weeks, with no better
     arms than those of acquaintance, a change which the influence of love had not been able to do
     in so many years. But it was not in Lucilla's nature to be daunted by a difficulty so
     unimportant. There was, thank Heaven, some difference between herself and the widow, who, in a
     strait, could think of nothing better to do, poor soul! than to faint; and Miss Marjoribanks
     had the advantage of never as yet having been beaten, whereas Mrs Mortimer had undergone
     numberless defeats.
The hardest matter in the whole business, however, was the identification of the Mr Kavan
     whom the Archdeacon thought he had seen in Carlingford, and was not afraid to speak of as a
     clever rascal and adventurer. Mr Beverley had never seen the fellow again, as he had told
     Lucilla not many days back, and Miss Marjoribanks had been unfeignedly glad to hear it; but now
     matters had changed. In the course of her reflections, she decided that it would now be best
     that these two men, if possible, should meet and recognise each other, and that the business
     should once for all be definitively settled. If all the offence he had committed against
     society was to have had a large sum of money left him by a childless old man, Lucilla saw no
     reason why this mysterious culprit should conceal himself; and even if he had taken a little
     liberty with his name, that was not a crime—his name was his own surely, if anything was his
     own. At the same time, Miss Marjoribanks took pains to impress upon herself, as it is to be
     hoped a friendly audience will also have the goodness to do, that she had no real
      foundation for her suspicions as to the identity of this personage, and might turn out to
     be completely mistaken. He might have made no change whatever on his name; he might be
     flourishing in some other quarter of England or the world, with all his antecedents perfectly
     well known, and unconscious of anything to be ashamed about; which, to tell the truth, was, as
     Lucilla confessed to herself, a much more likely hypothesis than the supposition which had
     taken such possession of her mind. But then Miss Marjoribanks had a just faith in her
     instincts, and in those brief but telling pieces of evidence which supported her conclusion.
     She was thinking over this important branch of the subject with the greatest care and devotion,
     when, looking out by chance into the rain, she saw the Archdeacon crossing the garden. Perhaps
     it was just as well that she thus had warning and a moment to prepare for his visit; not that
     Lucilla was a person to be taken at disadvantage; but still, in a matter so practical and
     pressing, it was always better to be prepared.
Mr Beverley came in with an air and expression so different from that which he had borne in
     their intercourse no further gone than yesterday, that, notwithstanding the corresponding
     revolution in her own mind, Miss Marjoribanks could not but regard him with mingled admiration
     and surprise. She judged him as the general world so often judged herself, and gave him credit
     for skill and courage in assuming such an attitude, when the fact was he was only preoccupied
     and natural, and did not think of his attitude at all. It did not occur to the Archdeacon that
     he had sinned towards Lucilla. He thought it right to explain to her his extreme surprise at
     the sight of Mrs Mortimer, and possibly to make her aware, at the same time, of his grievances,
     in so far as Mrs Mortimer was concerned; but perhaps Mr Beverley was, on the whole, innocent of
     those intentions which Mrs Chiley had attributed to him, and which even Lucilla, more
     clear-sighted, had seen dawning in their last interview; for, to be sure, this is one of the
     questions which the female intellect is apt to judge in a different light from that in which it
     is regarded by a man. The Archdeacon, accordingly, came in preoccupied, with a cloud on his
     brow, but without the smallest appearance of penitence or deprecation; by which demeanour he
     gained, without deserving it, the respect, and to a certain extent the admiration, of Lucilla.
     His expression was not that of a man repentant, but of a man aggrieved. He had a cloud upon his
     countenance, and a certain air of offence and temper; and when he sat down, he breathed a short
     impatient sigh.
"Thank you for receiving me so early," he said. "I called yesterday afternoon, but found you
     out. You must have had very particular business to take you out in that rain," Mr Beverley
     continued, with subdued exasperation; for naturally, being a clergyman, he was a little
     impatient to find, when it was he who wanted her, any of his female friends out of the
     way.
"Yes," said Lucilla, who thought it was best to open her battery boldly and at once. "I was
     spending the afternoon with poor Mrs Mortimer; poor dear, she is so solitary!" and to meet Mr
     Beverley's ill-temper, Miss Marjoribanks put on her most heavenly air of sympathy, and rounded
     her words with a soft sigh, as different from his as a flute is from a trumpet. It was with an
     exclamation of impatience that the Archdeacon replied.
"Poor Mrs Mortimer!" he cried; "I don't know whether you are aware how much her
     obstinacy has cost me; and herself, I suppose," he added, in a parenthesis. "Not to depreciate
     your kindness, or the truly human and Christian way in which you have conducted yourself—fancy
     what my feelings naturally must have been to find her an object of charity—actually of charity!
     I don't mean to say," said Mr Beverley, controlling himself, "that it is degrading to accept
     succour when given as from man to man—quite the contrary; but you will excuse me from entering
     into the general question. She knew perfectly well that if I had known where she was—if she had
     consented to yield to me on one point—solely on one point——"
"And she such an obstinate woman!" said Miss Marjoribanks, with fine scorn. "How could you
     ever think of such a thing? A woman that never gives in to anybody. If you knew her as well as
     I do——"
The Archdeacon glanced up with a momentary intense surprise, as if it was within the
     possibilities that such a change might have taken place in the widow's nature; and then he
     caught Lucilla's eye, and grew red and more aggrieved than ever.
"Mrs Mortimer happens to be a relative of mine," he said, in his authoritative voice. "I have
     known her from her youth. I am better instructed in all her affairs than she can possibly be.
     When I urge her to any step, however much it may be against her inclinations, she ought to know
     that it can only be for her good. I beg your pardon, Miss Marjoribanks. It will give me great
     grief to find that you, upon whose superior good sense I have so much calculated, should
     support her in her folly. I know how much she owes to you——"
"Oh, no, she does not owe me anything," said Lucilla. "It was just my luck, you know. I knew
     she would turn out to be a lady. I don't want to stand up for her if she is wrong; but I have
     only heard her side. When you tell me about it, I shall be able to form an opinion,"
     Miss Marjoribanks added prudently; "for of course everything has two sides."
"Most things," said Mr Beverley, "but this is precisely one of the things which have not two
     sides. Nothing except some sort of infatuation or other—but never mind, you shall hear the
     facts," said the Archdeacon, once more making an effort upon himself. "Her uncle, Mr Garrett,
     was above eighty. Why Providence should have let him live to such an age to do so much
     mischief, Heaven alone knows. Some different rule seems to exist up there about those
     matters, from what we find to answer on earth," the Broad-Churchman said, with a certain air of
     disapproval. "He had this young fellow to see him and then to live with him, and took some sort
     of idiotic fancy to him; and when the will was made, it was found that, with the exception of a
     small sum to Helen, everything was left to this impostor. No, I can't say I have any patience
     with her folly. How could any man have two opinions on the subject? He was neither related to
     him, nor connected with him," cried Mr Beverley, with a momentary inclination, as Lucilla
     thought, to get aground among the pronouns, as Mrs Mortimer had done. "I do not suspect my
     cousin," the Archdeacon continued, with an air so severe and indignant that it was evident he
     was contradicting his own sentiments, "of having any partiality for such a person; but
     certainly her obstinacy and determination are such——"
"Hush, please," said Lucilla; "you are only laughing when you use such words. Now, tell me
     one thing, and don't be angry if it is a stupid question—If there was any one that knew her and
     you, and perhaps him, and was to try—don't you think it might be arranged?"
"By money?" said the Archdeacon; and he smiled one of those disagreeable smiles which
     youthful writers describe by saying that his lip curled with scorn. "You seem to take me for
     Mortimer, who could go into that sort of compromise. I suppose he did give them money
     before—before she was left a widow," said Mr Beverley, grinding his teeth slightly with a
     savage expression. "No, Miss Marjoribanks. Where everlasting truth and justice are concerned, I
     do not understand how things can be arranged."
After such a truculent statement, what was the peacemaker to do? She left the fire to blaze
     out by itself for a minute or two, and then she came down upon the enemy on another wind.
"I am sure I am very sorry," said Lucilla softly, "to think you should be so fond of her and
     she so fond of you, and nothing but this standing in the way; and then she is too good for this
     world, and never thinks of herself. I often think, if anything was to happen to me—and my life
     is no safer than other people's lives," said Miss Marjoribanks, with a sigh—"what would become
     of her, poor dear! I am sure, if I knew of any way——As for obstinate, you know it is not in her
     to be obstinate. She thinks she is right, and you think you are right; and I suppose neither of
     you will give in," cried Lucilla. "What is anybody to do?"
"If any one gives in, it should be she," said the Archdeacon. "For my part, I will never
     stand by and consent to such a robbery,—never. In these matters, at least, a man must be a
     better judge than a woman. If you are her friend you will persuade her of her duty," Mr
     Beverley added; and he did not show so much as a symptom of yielding. To say that Miss
     Marjoribanks was not discouraged would be more than the truth; but she was still at the
     beginning of her forces, and no thought of giving in was in her courageous soul.
"I will tell you what occurs to me," said Lucilla frankly. "Let us find out something about
     him. Do you know anything about him? If she were to hear that he was, as you say, an impostor,
     you know, and a villain?—What is his name?—Where does he live?—Is he a very, very wicked man?"
     said Miss Marjoribanks, and she looked up with that ingenuous look of appeal, which was always
     so touching in her, to the Archdeacon's face.
As for Mr Beverley, in his haste and excitement, he gave vent to two very contradictory
     statements. "She knows all about him. I don't know anything about him," he said, with some
     heat. "I mean, she knows as much as I do, though she draws such a different conclusion. I am
     sure I saw him in Carlingford the first day I was here. For anything I can tell, she knows
      more of him than I do," said the Broad Churchman, with a sudden flash of jealousy and
     anger. It occurred to Lucilla then for the first time that she had found the grand clue to the
     whole.
"That would be dreadful," said Miss Marjoribanks, "if she knew him, and was keeping him out
     of the way till you were gone. I did not think of that. If such a thing should be the case,
     fond as I am of Mrs Mortimer, I never could go near her any more," said Lucilla sadly. "Oh,
     don't say you think so, please. I should have to give her up, and that would be dreadful; for I
     owe it to papa, when he gives me so much liberty, to be very careful. Oh, Mr Beverley, don't
     say you think so," cried Lucilla, deeply moved. She put her handkerchief to her eyes, and yet
     she kept watch upon the Archdeacon through one of the corners. He had got up by this time, and
     was walking about the room like any other man in trouble. To throw suspicion on the widow, or
     separate her from so effectual a protector, was the very last thing he had any inclination to
     do: for, to tell the truth, he made that jealous suggestion only in order to receive an
     indignant denial, and to be assured that such a thing was impossible. But then Mr Beverley did
     not know whom he had to deal with, nor that he was not the first man whom Miss Marjoribanks had
     reduced to his proper place.
"If that was the case," said Lucilla, drying her eyes, "dreadful as it is to think of it—oh,
     Mr Beverley, if such a thing were the case—it would be far better for her to marry him, and
     then she would have all the fortune without going to law. If things have gone so far, though it
     is miserable to think of it, and to believe that she could be so unkind," said Miss
     Marjoribanks, with a sob, "and so double-minded, and so deceitful to me——"
"In Heaven's name what are you thinking of?" said the Archdeacon. He had grown as pale as he
     was before red, and came to a dead stop in front of Lucilla, and stood lowering and menacing
     over her. His shadow was so big and strong, and stood so directly between her and the window,
     that Miss Marjoribanks's heart gave one bound of something like alarm.
"Dear Mr Beverley," said Lucilla, "try and compose yourself. It would be a dreadful trial to
     me, but I should endeavour to bear it. If we love her, we should, on the contrary, urge her to
     do it," said the young moralist, with solemnity, "however hard it may be to us. It would be
     better than—than dreadful concealment and misery—it would be better than knowing and not
     telling, as you say. Oh, Mr Beverley, if you are sure that is the case, let us both go to her,
     and beg her to marry him. I could never, never, never see her again," sobbed Lucilla, "but she
     would be happy, and that would be the end of all."
The Archdeacon, though he was not a weakling, was altogether stunned by this address. He sank
     into the nearest chair, and drew it closer to Lucilla, and looked perfectly flabby and ghastly
     in his white tie, with his alarmed countenance. "For the sake of all that is sacred," said Mr
     Beverley, bending forward towards her, "tell me what foundation you have—tell me all you
     know."
Now was the critical moment, and Lucilla felt it. If Mrs Chiley, for example, had only
     advised herself to come in then instead of interrupting people's proposals, and driving a
     likely suitor to desperation! But such happy chances do not occur at the real crises of life.
     What she wanted was, naturally, not to explain herself, but to let that arrow rankle in her
     opponent's heart until it should have served her purpose. All that she said in answer to Mr
     Beverley's appeal was to hide her face in her handkerchief, which was the only means that
     occurred to her for the moment of gaining a little time for reflection.
"It is so hard to have such thoughts put into one's head," said Lucilla, "of a person who has
     been one's friend. And she always looked so nice and so true! I never thought she would deceive
     any one. I thought she was so transparent, you know. Oh, Mr Beverley, it is so dreadful to be
     disappointed in one's friends! I wish I had never heard of it—I wish you had never told me. I
     almost wish, though it is dreadful to say such a thing, that you had never come to Carlingford
     and found it all out."
"My dear Miss Marjoribanks," said the Archdeacon solemnly, "I implore you, as the greatest
     kindness you can do me, to tell me all you know."
"Indeed, I don't know what I know," said Lucilla, partially raising her face out of her
     handkerchief; "I don't think I know anything, for my part. I always thought if one could rely
     upon any one, one could rely upon her—for truthfulness, and for yieldingness, and doing what
     any one asked her. I did think so; and it is perfectly bewildering to think, after all, that
     she should be obstinate and deceiving, and yet look so different!" said Lucilla. "But if it has
     come to that, we must be firm, Mr Beverley. If you ask my opinion, I say she should be allowed
     to marry him. That would solve everything, you know," Miss Marjoribanks added, with sad
     decision. "She would get all the fortune without going to law, and she would be settled, and
     off one's mind. That would be my final advice, if everything has happened as you say."
Mr Beverley was driven as nearly out of his senses by this counsel as it was possible for a
     man of ordinary self-control and warm temper to be. He got up again and made a stride to and
     fro, and wiped the moisture from his forehead, which, as Lucilla remarked at the moment, had a
     Low-Church look, which she would not have expected from him. But, on the other hand, he gave
     vent to some stifled and unintelligible exclamations which, whatever they might be, were not
     blessings. Then he came to himself a little, which was what Miss Marjoribanks was most afraid
     of, and stood over her, large and imposing as before.
"Tell me, for Heaven's sake, what you mean!" cried the Archdeacon. "You do not think, surely,
     that I for a moment meant to imply that Helen would waste a thought upon such a miscreant. Good
     Heavens, marry him! You must be raving. She would as soon think of—going for a soldier," said
     Mr Beverley, with a hoarse and perfectly unmirthful laugh, "or doing anything else that was mad
     and unnatural. That is how you women stand up for your friends—always ready to suggest
     something inconceivably horrible and debasing! Happily you always go too far," he added, once
     more wiping his forehead. It was a very Low-Church, not to say Dissenterish, sort of thing to
     do, and it unconsciously reduced her adversary's dignity in Miss Marjoribanks's opinion,
     besides affording a proof that he was not nearly so much convinced of what he said, as he
     professed to be, in his secret heart.
"Mr Beverley, I think you forget a little," said Lucilla, with dignity. "I know nobody but
     yourself who has any suspicions of Mrs Mortimer. If it had been anybody but you, I should have
     laughed at them. But to return to the question," Miss Marjoribanks added, with calm grace: "I
     always used to be taught at Mount Pleasant that feelings had nothing to do with an abstract
     subject. I don't see, for my part, now you have mentioned it, why she should not marry him. It
     would arrange the money matter without any trouble; and I have always heard he was very nice,"
     said the bold experimentalist, fixing her eyes calmly upon the Archdeacon's face. "I am sure I
     should never have thought of it, if it had been left to me; but speaking calmly, I don't see
     the objections, now it has been proposed. Oh, it is only the bell for luncheon that Thomas is
     ringing. Is it actually half-past one? and I expect some people," said Lucilla. She got up as
     she spoke and went to the mirror, and looked at herself with that beautiful simplicity which
     was one of Miss Marjoribanks's distinguishing features. "When one has been crying it always
     shows," she said, with a little anxiety. As for Mr Beverley, his state of mind, as the
     newspapers say, could better be imagined than described.
"I must go away," he said, taking up his hat. "I don't feel capable of meeting strangers
     after this exciting conversation. Miss Marjoribanks," continued the Archdeacon, taking her
     hand, and holding it fast over his hat to give emphasis to his address, "at least I can trust
     to you not to breathe a word to Mrs Mortimer—not a syllable—of the horrible suggestion which
     has got utterance, I don't know how. I may surely trust to your honour," Mr Beverley said, with
     emphasis; but by this time Miss Marjoribanks considered it time to bring the crisis to an
     end.
"I wish you would stay to luncheon," she said; "there are only one or two of my friends. As
     for honour, you know you gentlemen say that we have no sense of honour," said Lucilla
     airily; "and to think that two women could be together and not talk of what might perhaps be a
     marriage——"
At this moment some one rang the door-bell. Lucilla knew perfectly well that it was only the
     baker, but it could not be expected that the Archdeacon should be similarly initiated into the
     secrets of the house. He thought, as was natural, that it was the people she expected, and
     almost wrung her hand as he let it go. "You will let me see you again first," he said, in a
     tone of entreaty. "Before you see her, you will let me see you again. For Heaven's sake don't
     refuse me," cried Mr Beverley. If anybody had but heard him! as Lucilla said to herself the
     minute he was gone. And the truth was that Thomas did hear him, who had just opened the door to
     tell his young mistress that her luncheon was waiting, and whom the Archdeacon did all but
     knock downstairs in his sudden and unlooked-for exit. The impression naturally conveyed to
     Thomas by these words was of the clearest and most distinct description. He was even known to
     say afterwards, "That he never knew a gentleman as spoke more plain." But Mr Beverley rushed
     downstairs, without thinking of Thomas, in a most unenviable frame of mind, into the rain. He
     was more afraid of meeting Miss Marjoribanks's friends than a man of his size and principles
     should have been afraid of meeting anybody; but then there is a vast distinction, as everybody
     is aware, and no one more than the Archdeacon, between physical and moral strength.
As for Lucilla, her tears and anxieties passed off in a miraculous manner as soon as her
     visitor was gone. She went downstairs and ate her luncheon with the serenest brow and a most
     agreeable ladylike appetite. And it was not a fib, as may perhaps be supposed, that she was
     expecting people—for at that hour Miss Marjoribanks always did expect people, who, to be sure,
     might be kept back by the rain, but whom she was always justified in looking for. Perhaps, on
     the whole, notwithstanding her warm sense of the duties of hospitality, Lucilla was glad that
     it rained so heavily, and that nobody came. She had a great deal to think of as she took her
     maidenly and delicate repast. The first step had been taken, and taken triumphantly.
     Henceforward, whatever the Archdeacon's illusions might be, he could no longer stand calm upon
     his eminence, and conclude that it was he, and he alone, who could raise the widow from her
     lowly estate. Lucilla, it is true, knew that no such idea as that of marrying her uncle's heir
     would ever present itself to Mrs Mortimer; and that—at least so far as Miss Marjoribanks's
     information went—such a thought was equally removed from the mind of the personage unknown,
     whom Mr Beverley denounced as an impostor. But this did not in the least affect the value of
     the suggestion as an instrument to be used against the Archdeacon, who was big enough to defend
     himself, and on whose account the young philanthropist had no compunctions. The first step was
     thus taken, and taken successfully, but it was only after this that the real difficulties
     began; and Lucilla knew no more as yet how she was to find and identify, not to say assail and
     vanquish, the other side, the mysterious Mr Kavan, the man whom the Archdeacon abused and the
     widow defended, than even the greatest military genius knows at the commencement of the first
     campaign how to conduct the second. This was what she considered so closely as she sat alone in
     the dull afternoon. She did not go to Mrs Mortimer, because it was impossible that every day
     could be a half-holiday, and because, on the whole, she judged it best not to subject herself,
     in the present undeveloped state of the position, to much questioning; but she sent her a
     little note to satisfy her mind, telling her to keep herself easy, and not to let the
     Archdeacon bully her, and to confide in the devotion of her affectionate Lucilla. When she had
     thus satisfied the immediate demands of friendship, Miss Marjoribanks took her work and sat
     down to reflect. Nothing could be more exciting than the position in which she found herself;
     but the difficulties were only such as stimulated her genius; and then it was not any selfish
     advantage, but the good of her neighbour in its most sublime manifestation—the good of her
     neighbour who had injured her, and been insensible to her attractions, which, according to the
     world in general, is the one thing unpardonable to a woman—which Lucilla sought. And it was not
     even the scriptural coals of fire she was thinking of as she pondered her great undertaking in
     her mind. The enterprise might not be free from a touch of human vanity, but it was vanity of a
     loftier description: the pleasure of exercising a great faculty, and the natural confidence of
     genius in its own powers.
