
CHAPTER XIV.

'Twas a long doubt; we never heard
   Exactly how the ship went down.Archer Gurney.
The tidings came at last, came when the heart-sickness of hope-deferred had faded
      into the worse heart-sickness of fear deferred, and when spirits had been fain to rebel, and
      declare that they would be almost glad to part with the hope that but kept alive despair.

The Christmas holidays had come to an end, and the home party were again alone, when early
      in the forenoon, there was a tap at the drawing-room door, and Dr. Spencer called, 'Ethel, can
      you come and speak to me?'
Margaret started as if those gentle tones had been a thunderclap. Go! go, Ethel,' she said,
      'don't keep me waiting.'
Dr. Spencer stood in the hall with a newspaper in his hand. Ethel said, 'Is it?' and he made
      a sorrowful gesture.
'Both?' she asked.
'Both,' he repeated. 'The ship burnt—the boat lost.'
'Ethel, come!' hoarsely called Margaret.
'Take it,' said Dr. Spencer, putting the paper into her hand; 'I will wait.'
She obeyed. She could not speak, but kneeling down by her sister, they read the paragraph
      together; Ethel, with one eye on the words, the other on Margaret.
No doubt was left. Captain Gordon had returned, and this was his official report. The names
      of the missing stood below, and the list began thus— Lieutenant A. H. Ernescliffe. Mr. Charles
      Owen, Mate. Mr. Harry May, Midshipman. 
The Alcestis had taken fire on the 12th of April of the former year. There had been much
      admirable conduct, and the intrepid coolness of Mr. Ernescliffe was especially recorded. The
      boats had been put off without loss, but they were scantily provisioned, and the nearest land
      was far distant. For five days the boats kept together, then followed a night of storms, and,
      when morning dawned, the second cutter, under command of Mr. Ernescliffe, had disappeared.
      There could be no doubt that she had sunk, and the captain could only record his regrets for
      the loss the service had experienced in the three brave young officers and their gallant
      seamen. After infinite toil and suffering, the captain, with the other boats' crews, had
      reached Tahiti, whence they had made their way home.
'O Margaret, Margaret!' cried Ethel.
Margaret raised herself, and the colour came into her face. 'I did not write the letter!'
      she said.
'What letter?' said Ethel, alarmed.
'Richard prevented me. The letter that would have parted us. Now all is well.'
'All is well, I know, if we could but feel it.'
'He never had the pain. It is unbroken!' continued Margaret, her eyes brightening, but her
      breath, in long-drawn gasps that terrified Ethel into calling Dr. Spencer.

Mary was standing before him, with bloodless face and dilated eyes; but, as Ethel
      approached, she turned and rushed up-stairs.
Dr. Spencer entered the drawing-room with Ethel, who tried to read his face as he saw
      Margaret—restored, as it seemed, to all her girlish bloom, and her eyes sparkling as they were
      lifted up, far beyond the present scene. Ethel had a moment's sense that his expression was as
      if he had seen a death-blow struck, but it was gone in a moment, as he gently shook Margaret
      by the hand, and spoke a word of greeting, as though to recall her.
'Thank you,' she said, with her own grateful smile.
'Where is your father?' he asked of Ethel.
'Either at the hospital, or at Mr. Ramsden's,' said Ethel, with a ghastly suspicion, that he
      thought Margaret in a state to require him.
'Papa!' said Margaret. 'If he were but here! But—ah! I had forgotten.'
She turned aside her head, and hid her face. Dr. Spencer signed Ethel nearer to him. 'This
      is a more natural state,' he said. 'Dont be afraid for her. I will find your father, and bring
      him home.' Pressing her hand he departed.
Margaret was weeping tranquilly—Ethel knelt down beside her, without daring at first to
      speak, but sending up intense mental prayers to Him, who alone could bear her or her dear
      father through their affliction. Then she ventured to take her hand, and Margaret returned the
      caress, but began to blame herself for the momentary selfishness that had allowed her
      brother's loss and her father's grief to have been forgotten in her own.—Ethel's "oh! no! no!"
      did not console her for this which seemed the most present sorrow, but the flow of tears was
      so gentle, that Ethel trusted that they were a relief. Ethel herself seemed only able to watch
      her, and to fear for her father, not to be able to think for herself.
The front door opened, and they heard Dr. May's step hesitating in the hall, as if he could
      not bear to come in.
'Go to him!' cried Margaret, wiping off her tears.
Ethel stood a moment in the door-way, then sprang to him, and was clasped in his arms.
'You know it?' he whispered.
'Dr. Spencer told us. Did not you meet him?'
'No. I read it at Bramshaw's office. How—' He could not say the words, but he looked towards
      the room, and wrung the hand he held.
'Quiet. Like herself. Come.'
He threw one arm round Ethel, and laid his hand on her head, 'How much there is to be
      thankful for!' he said, then advancing, he hung over Margaret, calling her his own poor
      darling.

'Papa, you must forgive me. You said, sending him to sea was giving him up.'
'Did I. Well, Margaret, he did his duty. That is all we have to live for. Our yellow-haired
      laddie made a gallant sailor, and—'
Tears choked his utterance—Margaret gently stroked his hand.
'It falls hard on you, my poor girl,' he said.
'No, papa,' said Margaret, 'I am content and thankful. He is spared pain and
      perplexity.'
'You are right, I believe,' said Dr. May. 'He would have been grieved not to find you
      better.'
'I ought to grieve for my own selfishness,' said Margaret. 'I cannot help it! I cannot be
      sorry the link is unbroken, and that he had not to turn to anyone else.'
'He never would!' cried Dr. May, almost angrily.
'I tried to think he ought,' said Margaret. 'His life would have been too dreary. But it is
      best as it is.'
'It must be,' said the Doctor. 'Where are the rest, Ethel? Call them all down.'
Poor Mary, Ethel felt as if she had neglected her! She found her hanging over the nursery
      fire, alternating with old nurse in fond reminiscences of Harry's old days, sometimes almost
      laughing at his pranks, then crying again, while Aubrey sat between them, drinking in each
      word.
Blanche and Gertrude came from the school-room, where Miss Bracy seemed to have been
      occupying them, with much kindness and judgment. She came to the door to ask Ethel anxiously
      for the Doctor and Miss May, and looked so affectionate and sympathizing, that Ethel gave her
      a hearty kiss.
'Dear Miss Ethel! if you can only let me help you.'
'Thank you,' said Ethel with all her heart, and hurried away.
Nothing was more in favour of Miss Bracy, than that there should be a hurry. Then she could
      be warm, and not morbid.
Dr. May gathered his children round him, and took out the great Prayer-book. He read a Psalm
      and a prayer from the Burial Service, and the sentence for funerals at sea. Then he touched
      each of their heads, and, in short broken sentences, gave thanks for those still left to him,
      and for the blessed hope they could feel for those who were gone; and he prayed that they
      might so follow in their footsteps, as to come to the same Holy place, and in the meantime
      realize the Communion of Saints. Then they said the Lord's Prayer, he blessed them, and they
      arose.
'Mary, my dear,' he said, 'you have a photograph.'
She put the case into his hands, and ran away.

He went to the study, where he found Dr. Spencer awaiting him.
'I am only come to know where I shall go for you.'
'Thank you, Spencer. Thank you for taking care of my poor girls.'
'They took care of themselves. They have the secret of strength.'
'They have—' He turned aside, and burst out, 'Oh, Spencer! you have been spared a great
      deal. If you missed a great deal of joy, you have missed almost as much sorrow!' And, covering
      his face, he let his grief have a free course.
'Dick! dear old Dick, you must bear up. Think what treasures you have left.'
'I do. I try to do so,' said poor Dr. May; 'but, Spencer, you never saw my yellow-haired
      laddie, with his lion look! He was the flower of them all! Not one of these other boys came
      near him in manliness, and with such a loving heart! An hour ago, I thought any certainty
      would be gain, but now I would give a lifetime to have back the hope that I might see my boy's
      face again! O, Spencer! this is the first time I could rejoice that his mother is not
      here!'
'She would have been your comforter,' sighed his friend, as he felt his inability to contend
      with such grief.
'There, I can be thankful,' Dr. May said, and he looked so. 'She has had her brave loving
      boy with her all this time, while we little thought—but there are others. My poor
      Margaret—'
'Her patience must be blessed,' said Dr. Spencer. 'I think she will be better. Now
      that the suspense no longer preys on her, there will be more rest.'
'Rest,' repeated Dr. May, supporting his head on his hand; and, looking up dreamily—' there
      remaineth a rest—'
The large Bible lay beside him, on the table, and Dr. Spencer thought that he would find
      more rest there than in his words. Leaving him, therefore, his friend went to undertake his
      day's work, and learn, once more, in the anxious enquiries, and saddened countenances of the
      patients and their friends, how great an amount of love and sympathy that Dr. May had won by
      his own warmth of heart. The patients seemed to forget their complaints in sighs for their
      kind Doctors troubles; and the gouty Mayor of Stoneborough kept Dr. Spencer half-an-hour to
      listen to his recollections of the bright-faced boy's droll tricks, and then to the praises of
      the whole May family, and especially of the mother.
Poor Dr. Spencer! he heard her accident described so many times in the course of the day,
      that his visits were one course of shrinking and suffering; and his only satisfaction was in
      knowing how his friend would be cheered, by hearing of the universal feeling for him and his
      children.

Ethel wrote letters to her brothers; and Dr. May added a few lines, begging Richard to come
      home, if only for a few days. Margaret would not be denied writing to Hector Ernescliffe,
      though she cried over her letter so much, that her father could almost have taken her pen
      away; but she said it did her good.
When Flora came in the afternoon, Ethel was able to leave Margaret to her, and attend to
      Mary, with whom Miss Bracy's kindness had been inefficacious. If she was cheered for a few
      minutes, some association, either with the past, or the vanished future, soon set her off
      sobbing again. 'If I only knew where dear, dear Harry is lying,' she sobbed, 'and that it had
      not been very bad indeed, I could bear it better.'
The ghastly uncertainty was too terrible for Ethel to have borne to contemplate it. She knew
      that it would haunt their pillows, and she was trying to nerve herself by faith.
'Mary,' she said, 'that is the worst; but, after all, God willed that we should not know. We
      must bear it like His good children. It makes no difference to them now—'
'I know,' said Mary, trying to check her sobs.
'And, you know, we are all in the same keeping. The sea is a glorious great pure thing, you
      know, that man cannot hurt or defile. It seems, to me,' said Ethel, looking up, 'as if resting
      there was like being buried in our Baptism-tide over again, till the great new Birth. It must
      be the next best place to a Churchyard. Any where, they are as safe as among the daisies in
      our own Cloister.
'Say it again—what you said about the sea,' said Mary, more comforted than if Ethel had been
      talking down to her.
By-and-by, Ethel discovered that the sharpest trouble to the fond simple girl, was the
      deprivation of her precious photograph. It was like losing Harry over again, to go to bed
      without it, though she would not for the world seem to grudge it to her father.
Ethel found an opportunity of telling him of this distress, and it almost made him smile.
      'Poor Mary,' he said, 'is she so fond of it? It is rather a libel than a likeness.'
'Don't say so to her, pray, papa. It is all the world to her. Three strokes on paper would
      have been the same, if they had been called by his name.'
'Yes; a loving heart has eyes of its own, and she is a dear good girl!'
He did not forget to restore the treasure with gratitude proportionate to what the loan had
      cost Mary. With a trembling voice, she proffered it to him for the whole day, and every day,
      if she might only have it at night; and she even looked blank when he did not accept the
      proposal.

'It is exactly like—' said she.
'It can't help being so, in a certain sense,' he answered kindly, 'but after all, Mary dear,
      he did not pout out his chin in that way.'
Mary was somewhat mortified, but she valued her photograph more than ever, because no one
      else would admire it, except Daisy, whom she had taught to regard it with unrivalled
      veneration.
A letter soon arrived from Captain Gordon, giving a fuller account of the loss of his ship,
      and of the conduct of his Officers, speaking in the highest terms of Alan Ernescliffe, for
      whom he said he mourned as for his own son, and, with scarcely less warmth, of Harry,
      mentioning the high esteem all had felt for the boy, and the good effect which the influence
      of his high and truthful spirit had produced on the other youngsters, who keenly regretted
      him.
Captain Gordon added that the will of the late Captain Ernescliffe had made him guardian of
      his sons, and that he believed poor Alan had died intestate. He should therefore take upon
      himself the charge of young Hector, and he warmly thanked Dr. May and his family for all the
      kindness that the lad had received.
Though the loss of poor Hector's visits was regretted, it was, on the whole, a comforting
      letter, and would give still more comfort in future time.
Richard contrived to come home through Oxford and see Norman, whom he found calm, and almost
      relieved by the cessation from suspense; not inclined, as his father had feared, to drown
      sorrow in labour, but regarding his grief as an additional call to devote himself to
      ministerial work. In fact, the blow had fallen when he first heard the rumour of danger, and
      could not recur with the same force.
Richard was surprised to find that Margaret was less cast down than he could have dared to
      hope. It did not seem like an affliction to her. Her countenance wore the same gentle smile,
      and she was as ready to participate in all that passed, finding sympathy for the little
      pleasures of Aubrey and Gertrude, and delighting in Flora's baby; as well as going over
      Cocksmoor politics with a clearness and accuracy that astonished him, and asking questions
      about his parish and occupations, so as fully to enjoy his short visit, which she truly called
      the greatest possible treat.
If it had not been for the momentary consternation that she had seen upon Dr. Spencer's
      face, Ethel would have been perfectly satisfied; but she could not help sometimes entertaining
      a dim fancy that this composure came from a sense that she was too near Alan to mourn for him.
      Could it be true that her frame was more wasted, that there was less capability of exertion,
      that her hours
       became later in the morning, and that her nights were more wakeful? Would she
      fade away? Ethel longed to know what her father thought, but she could neither bear to inspire
      him with the apprehension, nor to ask Dr. Spencer's opinion, lest she should be confirmed in
      her own.
The present affliction altered Dr. May more visibly than the death of his wife, perhaps,
      because there was not the same need of exertion. If he often rose high in faith and
      resignation, he would also sink very low under the sense of bereavement and disappointment.
      Though Richard was his stay, and Norman his pride, there was something in Harry more congenial
      to his own temper, and he could not but be bowed down by the ruin of such bright hopes. With
      all his real submission, he was weak, and gave way to outbursts of grief, for which he blamed
      himself as unthankful; and his whole demeanour was so saddened and depressed, that Ethel and
      Dr. Spencer consulted mournfully over him, whenever they walked to Cocksmoor together.
This was not as often as usual, though the walls of the school were rising, for Dr. Spencer
      had taken a large share of his friend's work for the present, and both physicians were much
      occupied by the condition of Mr. Ramsden, who was fast sinking, and, for some weeks, seemed
      only kept alive by their skill. The struggle ended at last, and his forty years' cure of
      Stoneborough was closed. It made Dr. May very sad—his affections had tendrils for any thing
      that he had known from boyhood; and though he had often spoken strong words of the Vicar, he
      now sat sorrowfully moralizing, and making excuses. 'People in former times had not so high an
      estimate of pastoral duty—poor Mr. Ramsden had not much education—he was already old when
      better times came in— he might have done better in a less difficult parish with better laity
      to support him, etc.' Yet after all, he exclaimed with one of his impatient gestures,
      'Better have my Harry's seventeen years than his sixty-seven!'
'Better improve a talent, than lay it by!' said Ethel.
'Hush! Ethel. How do you know what he may have done? If he acted up to his own standard, he
      did more than most of us.'
'Which is best,' said Ethel, 'a high standard not acted up to, or a lower one
      fulfilled?'
'I think it depends on the will,' said Margaret.
'Some people are angry with those whose example would shew that there is a higher standard,'
      said Ethel.
'And,' said Margaret, 'some who have the high one set before them, content themselves with
      knowing that it cannot be fully attained, and will not try.'

'The standard is the effect of early impression,' said Dr. May. 'I should be very sorry to
      think it could not be raised.'
'Faithful in a little—' said Ethel. 'I suppose all good people's standard is always going
      higher.'
'As they comprehend more of absolute perfection,' said Margaret.
