
CHAPTER X.

                     'A tale
Would rouse adventurous courage in a boy,
And make him long to be a mariner,
That he might rove the main.'Southey.
Etheldred had the satisfaction of seeing the Taylors at school on Sunday, but no
      Halls made their appearance, and, on inquiry, she was told, 'Please ma'am, they said they
      would not come;' so Ethel condemned Granny Hall as 'a horrid, vile, false, hypocritical old
      creature! It was no use having any thing more to do with her.'
'Very well,' said Richard; 'then I need not speak to my father.'
'Ritchie now! you know I meant no such thing!'
'You know, it is just what will happen continually.'
'Of course there will be failures, but this is so abominable, when they had those nice
      frocks, and those two beautiful eighteen-penny shawls! There are three shillings out of my
      pound thrown away!'
'Perhaps there was some reason to prevent them. We will go and see.'
'We shall only hear some more palavering. I want to have no more to say to—' but here Ethel
      caught herself up, and began to perceive what a happiness it was that she had not the power of
      acting on her own impulses.
The twins and their little brother of two years old were Christened in the afternoon, and
      Flora invited the parents to drink tea in the kitchen, and visit Lucy, while Ethel and Mary
      each carried a baby up-stairs to exhibit to Margaret.
Richard, in the meantime, had a conversation with John Taylor,
       and learnt a good deal about the district, and the number of the people. At tea,
      he began to rehearse his information, and the Doctor listened with interest, which put Ethel
      in happy agitation, believing that the moment was come, and Richard seemed to be only waiting
      for the conclusion of a long tirade against those who ought to do something for the place,
      when behold! Blanche was climbing on her father's knee, begging for one of his Sunday
      stories.
Etheldred was cruelly disappointed, and could not at first rejoice to see her father able
      again to occupy himself with his little girl. The narration, in his low tones, roused her from
      her mood of vexaation. It was the story of David, which he told in language scriptural and
      poetical, so pretty and tender in its simplicity, that she could not choose but attend. Ever
      and anon there was a glance towards Harry, as if he were secretly likening his own 'yellow
      haired laddie' to the 'shepherd boy, ruddy, and of a fair countenance.'
'So Tom and Blanche,' he concluded, 'can you tell me how we may be like the shepherd-boy,
      David?'
'There arn't giants now,' said Tom.
'Wrong is a giant,' said his little sister.
'Right, my white May-flower, and what then?'
'We are to fight,' said Tom.
'Yes, and mind, the giant with all his armour may be some great thing we have to do: but
      what did David begin with when he was younger?'
'The lion and the bear.'
'Aye, and minding his sheep. Perhaps little things, now you are little children, may be like
      the lion and the bear—so kill them off—get rid of them—cure yourself of whining or dawdling,
      or whatever it be, and mind your sheep well,' said he, smiling sweetly in answer to the
      children's earnest looks as they caught his meaning, and if you do, you will not find it near
      so hard to deal with your great giant struggle when it comes.'
Ah! thought Ethel, it suits me as well as the children. I have a great giant on Cocksmoor,
      and here I am, not allowed to attack him, because, perhaps, I am not minding my sheep, and
      letting my lion and my bear run loose about the house.
She was less impatient this week, partly from the sense of being on probation, and partly
      because she, in common with all the rest, was much engrossed with Harry's fate. He came home
      every day at dinner-time with Norman to ask if Alan Ernescliffe's letter had come; and at
      length Mary and Tom met them open-mouthed with the news that Margaret had it in her room.
Thither they hastened. Margaret held it out with a smile of congratulation. 'Here it is,
      Harry; papa said you were to have it,
       and consider it well, and let him know, when you had taken time. You must do it
      soberly. It is once for all.'
Harry's impetuosity was checked, and he took the letter quietly. His sister put her hand on
      his shoulder, 'Would you mind my kissing you, dear Harry?' and as he threw his arms round her
      neck, she whispered, 'Pray that you may choose right.'
He went quietly away, and Norman begged to know what had been Alan Ernescliffe's advice.
'I can scarcely say he gave any direct advice,' said Margaret; 'he would not have thought
      that called for. He said, no doubt there were hardships and temptations, more or less,
      according to circumstances; but, weighing one thing with another, he thought it gave as fair a
      chance of happiness as other professions, and the discipline and regularity had been very good
      for himself, as well as for many others he had known. He said, when a man is willing to go
      wrong there is much to help him, but when he is resolved on doing right, he need not be
      prevented.'
'That is what you may say of anything,' said Norman.
'Just so; and it answered papa's question, whether it was exposing Harry to more temptation
      than he must meet with anywhere. That was the reason it was such a comfort to have anyone to
      write to, who understands it so well.'
'Yes, and knows Harry's nature.'
'He said he had been fortunate in his captains, and had led, on the whole, a happy life at
      sea; and he thought if it was so with him, Harry was likely to enjoy it more, being of a hardy
      adventurous nature, and a sailor from choice, not from circumstances.'
'Then he advised for it? I did not think he would; you know he will not let Hector be a
      sailor.'
'He told me he thought only a strong natural bent that way made it desirable, and that he
      believed Hector only wished it from imitation of him. He said too, long ago, that he thought
      Harry cut out for a sailor.'
'A spirited fellow!' said Norman, with a look of saddened pride and approval, not at all
      like one so near the same age. 'He is up to anything, afraid of nothing, he can lick any boy
      in the school already. It will be worse than ever without him!'
'Yes, you will miss your constant follower. He has been your shadow ever since he could
      walk. But there's the clock, I must not keep you any longer; good-bye, Norman.'
Harry gave his brother the letter as soon as they were outside the house, and while he read
      it, took his arm and guided him. 'Well,' said Norman as he finished.
'It is all right,' said Harry; and the two brothers said no more;
       there was something rising up in their throats at the thought that they had very
      few more walks to take together to Bishop Whichcote's school; Norman's heart was very full at
      the prospect of another vacancy in his home, and Harry's was swelling between the ardour of
      enterprise and the thought of bidding good-bye to each familiar object, and, above all, to the
      brother who had been his model and admiration from babyhood.
'June!' at length he broke out, 'I wish you were going too. I should not mind it half so
      much if you were.'
'Nonsense, Harry! you want to be July after June all your life, do you? You'll be much more
      of a man without me.'
That evening Dr. May called Harry into his study to ask him if his mind was made up; he put
      the subject fairly before him, and told him not to be deterred from choosing what he thought
      would be for the best by any scruples about changing his mind. 'We shall not think a bit the
      worse of you; better now, than too late.'
There was that in his face and tone that caused Harry to say, in a stifled voice, 'I did not
      think you would care so much, papa; I won't go, if you do.'
Dr. May put his hand on his shoulder, and was silent. Harry felt a strange mixture of hope
      and fear, joy and grief, disappointment and relief. 'You must not give it up on that account,
      my dear,' he said at length; 'I should not let you see this, if it did not happen at a time
      when I can't command myself as I ought. If you were an only son, it might be your duty to
      stay; being one of many, 'tis nonsense to make a rout about parting with you. If it is better
      for you, it is better for all of us; and we shall do very well when you are once fairly gone.
      Don't let that influence you for a moment.'
Harry paused, not that he doubted, but he was collecting his energies—'Then, papa, I choose
      the Navy.'
'Then it is done, Harry. You have chosen in a dutiful, unselfish spirit, and I trust it will
      prosper with you; for I am sure your father's blessing—aye, and your mother's too, go with
      you! Now then,' after a pause, 'go and call Richard. I want him to write to Ernescliffe about
      that naval school. You must take your leave of the Whichcote foundation on Friday. I shall go
      and give Dr. Hoxton notice tomorrow, and get Tom's name down instead.'
And when the name of Thomas May was set down, Dr. Hoxton expressed his trust that it would
      pass through the school as free from the slightest blemish as those of Richard, Norman, and
      Harry May.
Now that Harry's destiny was fixed, Ethel began to think of Cocksmoor again, and she
      accomplished another walk there with Richard, Flora, and Mary, to question Granny Hall about
      the children's failure.

The old woman's reply was a tissue of contradictions: the girls were idle hussies, all
       contrary: they plagued the very life out of her, and she represented herself as
      using the most frightful threats, if they would not go to school. Breaking every bone in their
      skin was the least injury she promised them; till Mary, beginning to think her a cruel old
      woman, took hold of her brother's coat-tails for protection.
'But I am afraid, Mrs. Hall,' said Richard, in that tone which might be either ironical or
      simple, 'if you served them so, they would never be able to get to school at all, poor
      things.'
'Bless you, Sir, d'ye think I'd ever lay a finger near them; it's only the way one must talk
      to children, you see,' said she, patronizing his inexperience.
'Perhaps they have found that out,' said Richard.
Granny looked much entertained, and laughed triumphantly and shrewdly, 'aye, aye, that they
      have, the lasses—they be sharp enough for anything, that they be. Why, when I tell
      little Jenny that there's the black man coming after her, what does she do but she ups and
      says, 'Granny, I know 'tis only the wind in the chimney.'
'Then I don't think it seems to answer,' said Richard. 'Just suppose you were to try for
      once, really punishing them when they won't obey you, perhaps they would do it next time.'
'Why, Sir, you see I don't like to take the stick to them; they've got no mother, you see,
      Sir.'
Mary thought her a kind grandmother, and came out from behind her brother.
'I think it would be kinder to do it for once. What do you think they will do as they grow
      older, if you don't keep them in order when they are little?'
This was foresight beyond Granny Hall, who began to expatiate on the troubles she had
      undergone in their service, and the excellence of Sam. There was certainly a charm in her
      manners, for Ethel forgot her charge of ingratitude, the other sisters were perfectly taken
      with her, nor could they any of them help giving credence to her asseverations that Jenny and
      Polly should come to school next Sunday.
They soon formed another acquaintance; a sharp-faced woman stood in their path, with a
      little girl in her hand, and arrested them with a low curtsey, and not a very pleasant voice,
      addressing herself to Flora, who was quite as tall as Richard, and appeared the person of most
      consequence.
'If you please, Miss, I wanted to speak to you. I have got a little girl here, and I want to
      send her to school, only I have no shoes for her.'
'Why surely, if she can run about here on the heath, she can go to school,' said Flora.

'Oh! but there is all the other children to point at her. The poor thing would be daunted,
      you see, Miss; if I could but get some friend to give her a pair of shoes, I'd send her in a
      minute. I want her to get some learning; as I am always saying, I'd never keep her away, if I
      had but got the clothes to send her in. I never lets her be running on the common, like them
      Halls, as it's a shame to see them in nice frocks, as Mrs. Hall got by going hypercriting
      about.'
'What is your name?' said Richard, cutting her short.
'Watts, if you please, Sir; we heard there was good work up here, Sir, and so we came; but
      I'd never have set foot in it if I had known what a dark heathenish place it is, with never a
      Gospel minister to come near it,' and a great deal more to the same purpose.
Mary whispered to Flora something about having out-grown her boots, but Flora silenced her
      by a squeeze of the hand, and the two friends of Cocksmoor felt a good deal puzzled.
At last Flora said, 'You will soon get her clothed if she comes regularly to school on
      Sundays, for she will be admitted into the club; I will recommend her if she has a good
      character and comes regularly. Good morning, Mrs. Watts. Now we must go, or it will be dark
      before we get home.' And they walked hastily away.
'Horrid woman!' was Ethel's exclamation.
'But, Flora,' said innocent Mary, 'why would you not let me give the little girl my
      boots?'
'Perhaps I may, if she is good and comes to school,' said Flora.
'I think Margaret ought to settle what you do with your boots,' said Richard, not much to
      Flora's satisfaction.
'It is all the same,' she said. 'If I approve, Margaret will not object.'
'How well you helped us out, Flora,' said Ethel; 'I did not know in the least what to
      say.'
'It will be the best way of testing her sincerity,' said Flora, 'and at least it will do the
      child good; but I congratulate you on the promising aspect of Cocksmoor.'
'We did not expect to find a perfect place,' said Ethel; 'if it were, it would be of no use
      to go to it.'
Ethel could answer with dignity, but her heart sank at the aspect of what she had
      undertaken. She knew there would be evil, but she had expected it in a more striking and less
      disagreeable form.
That walk certainly made her less impatient, though it did not relax her determination, nor
      the guard over her lion and bear, which her own good feeling, aided by Margaret's counsel,
      showed her were the greatest hindrances to her doing anything good and great.
Though she was obliged to set to work so many principles and
       reflections to induce herself to wipe a pen, or to sit straight on her chair,
      that it was like winding up a steam-engine to thread a needle; yet the work was being
      done—she was struggling with her faults, humbled by them, watching them, and overcoming
      them.
Flora, meanwhile, was sitting calmly down in the contemplation of the unexpected services
      she had rendered, confident that her character for energy and excellence was established,
      believing it herself, and looking back on her childish vanity and love of domineering as long
      past and conquered. She thought her grown-up character had begun, and was too secure to
      examine it closely.
