
CHAPTER XXII.
'O dear !' sighed Etheldred, as she fastened her white muslin, 'I'm afraid it is
      my nature to hate my neighbour!'
'My dear Ethel, what is coming next?' said Margaret.
'I like my neighbour at home, and whom I have to work for, very much,' said Ethel, 'but oh!
      my neighbour that I have to be civil to!'
'Poor old King! I am afraid your day will be spoilt with all your toils as lady of the
      house. I wish I could help you.'
'Let me have my grumble out, and you will!' said Ethel.
'Indeed I am sorry you have this bustle, and so many to entertain, when I know you would
      rather have the peaceful feelings belonging to the day undisturbed. I should like to shelter
      you up here.'
'It is very ungrateful of me,' said Ethel, 'when Dr. Spencer works so hard for us, not to be
      willing to grant anything to him.'
'And—but then I have none of the trouble of it—I can't help liking the notion of sending out
      the Church to the island whence the Church came home to us.'
'Yes—' said Ethel, 'if we could do it without holding forth!'
'Come, Ethel, it is much better than the bazaar—it is no field for vanity.'
'Certainly not,' said Ethel. 'What a mess everyone will make! O if I could but stay away,
      like Harry! There will be Dr. Hoxton being sonorous and prosy, and Mr. Lake will stammer, and
      that will be nothing to the misery of our own people's work. George will flounder, and look at
      Flora, and she will sit with her eyes on the ground, and Dr. Spencer will come out of his
      proper self, and be complimentary to people who deserve it no more!—And Norman— I wish I could
      run away!'

'Richard says we do not guess how well Norman speaks.'
'Richard thinks Norman can do anything he can't do himself! It is all chance—he may do very
      well, if he gets into his " funny state ," but he always suffers for that, and he
      will certainly put one into an agony at the outset. I wish Dr. Spencer would have let him
      alone! And then there will be that Sir Henry, whom I can't abide! Oh! I wish I were more
      charitable, like Miss Bracy and Mary, who will think all so beautiful.'
'So will you, when you come home,' said Margaret.
'If I could only be talking to Cherry, and Dame Hall! I think the school children enter into
      it very nicely, Margaret. Did I tell you how nicely Ellen Reid answered about the Hymn, "From
      Greenland's icy mountains." She did not seem to have made it a mere geographical lesson, like
      Fanny Grigg—'
Ethel's misanthropy was happily conducted off via the Cocksmoor children, and any
      lingering remains were dissipated by her amusement at Dr. Spencer's ecstacy on seeing Dr. May
      assume his red robe of office, to go to the Minster in state, with the Town Council. He walked
      round and round his friend, called him Nicholas Randall redivivus , quoted Dogberry,
      and affronted Gertrude, who had a dim idea that he was making game of papa!
Ethel was one of those to whom representation was such a penance, that a festival,
      necessitating hospitality to guests of her own rank, was burthen enough seriously to disturb
      the repose of thankfulness for the attainment of her object, and to render difficult the
       recueillement which she needed for the praise and prayer that she felt due from her,
      and which seemed to oppress her heart, by a sense of the inadequacy of her partial expression.
      It was well for her that the day began with the calm service in the Minster, where it was her
      own fault if cares haunted her, and she could confess the sin of her irritated sensations, and
      wishes to have all her own way, and then, as ever, be led aright into thanksgiving for the
      unlooked for crowning of her labours.
The Archdeacon's sermon amplified what Margaret had that morning expressed, so as to carry
      on her sense of appropriateness in the offerings of the day being bestowed on distant
      lands.
But the ordeal was yet to come, and though blaming herself, she was anything but
      comfortable, as the world repaired to the Town-hall, the room where the same faces so often
      met for such diverse purposes —now an orrery displayed by a conceited lecturer, now a ball,
      now a magistrates' meeting, a concert or a poultry shew, where rival Hamburg and Dorking
      uplifted their voices in the places of Mario and Grisi, all beneath the benignant portrait of
      Nicholas Randall,
       ruffed, robed, square-toed, his endowment of the scholarship in his hand, and a
      chequered pavement at his feet.
Who knows not an S. P. G. meeting? the gaiety of the serious, and the first public spectacle
      to the young, who, like Blanche and Aubrey, gaze with admiration at the rows of bonnets, and
      with awe at the black coats on the platform, while the relations of the said black coats
      suffer, like Ethel, from nervous dread of the public speaking of their best friends.
Her expectations were realized by the Archdeacon's speech, which went round in a circle, as
      if he could not find his way out of it. Lord Cosham was fluent, but a great many words went to
      very small substance; and no wonder, thought Ethel, when all they had to propose and second
      was the obvious fact that Missions were very good things.
Dr. Hoxton pompously, Sir Henry Walkinghame creditably, assisted the ladies and gentlemen to
      resolve that the S. P. G. wanted help; Mr. Lake made a stammering, and Mr. Rivers, with his
      good-natured face, hearty manner, and good voice, came in well after him, with a
      straightforward speech, so brief, that Ethel gave Flora credit for the best she had yet
      heard.
Mr. Wilmot said something which the sharpest ears in the front row might, perhaps, have
      heard, and which resulted in Dr. Spencer standing up. Ethel hardly would have known who was
      speaking had her eyes been shut. His voice was so different, when raised and pitched, so as to
      shew its power and sweetness; the fine polish of his manner was redoubled, and every sentence
      had the most graceful turn. It was like listening to a well-written book, so smooth and so
      fluent, and yet so earnest—his pictures of Indian life so beautiful, and his strong affection
      for the converts he described now and then making his eyes fill, and his voice falter, as if
      losing the thread of his studied composition—a true and dignified work of art, that made Dr.
      May whisper to Flora, "You see what he can do. They would have given anything to have had him
      for a lecturer."
With half a sigh, Ethel saw Norman rise, and step forward. He began with eyes fixed on the
      ground, and, in a low modest tone, to speak of the islands that Harry had visited; but
      gradually the poetic nature, inherent in him, gained the mastery; and though his language was
      strikingly simple, in contrast with Dr. Spencer's ornate periods, and free from all trace of
      "the lamp," it rose in beauty and fervour at every sentence. The feelings that had decided his
      lot gave energy to his discourse, and repressed as they had been by reserve and diffidence,
      now flowed forth, and gave earnestness to natural gifts of eloquence of the highest order.
      After his quiet,
       unobtrusive beginning, there was the more wonder to find how he seemed to raise
      up the audience with him, in breathless attention, as to a strain of sweet music, carrying
      them without thought of the scene, or of the speaker, to the lovely isles, and the inhabitants
      of noble promise, but withering for lack of knowledge; and finally closing his speech, when
      they were wrought up to the highest pitch, by an appeal that touched them all home; 'for well
      did he know,' said he, 'that the universal brotherhood was drawn closest in circles nearer
      home, that beneath the shadow of their own old Minster, gladness and mourning floated alike
      for all; and that all those who had shared in the welcome to one, given back as it were from
      the grave, would own the same debt of gratitude to the hospitable islanders.'
He ceased. His father wiped his spectacles, and almost audibly murmured, "Bless him!" Ethel,
      who had sat like one enchanted, forgetting who spoke, forgetting all save the islanders,
      half-turned, and met Richard's smiling eyes, and his whisper—"I told you so."
The impress of a man of true genius and power had been made throughout the whole assembly;
      the Archdeacon put Norman out of countenance by the thanks of the meeting, for his admirable
      speech, and all the world, except the Oxford men, were in a state of as much surprise as
      pleasure.
'Splendid speaker, Norman May, if he would oftener put himself out,' Harvey Anderson
      commented. 'Pity he has so many of the good Doctor's prejudices!'
'Well, to be sure!' quoth Mrs. Ledwich. 'I knew Mr. Norman was very clever, but I declare I
      never thought of such as this! I will try my poor utmost for those interesting natives.'
'That youth has first-rate talents,' said Lord Cosham. 'Do you know what he is designed for?
      I should like to bring him forward.'
'Ah!' said Dr. Hoxton. 'The year I sent off May and Anderson was the proudest year of my
      life!'
'Upon my word!' declared Mrs. Elwood. 'That Dr. Spencer is as good as a book, but Mr. Norman
      — I say, father we will go without the new clock, but we'll send somewhat to they men that
      built up the Church, and has no Minister.'
'A good move that,' said Dr. Spencer. 'Worth at least £20. That boy has the temperament of
      an orator, if the morbid were but a grain less.'
'O Margaret,' exclaimed Blanche. 'Dr. Spencer made the finest speech you ever heard, only it
      was rather tiresome; and Norman made everybody cry—and Mary worse than all!'
'There is no speaking of it. One should live such things, not talk over them,' said Meta
      Rivers.

Margaret received the reports of the select few, who visited her up-stairs, where she was
      kept quiet, and only heard the hum of the swarm, whom Dr. May, in vehement hospitality, had
      brought home to luncheon, to Ethel's great dread, lest there should not be enough for them to
      eat.
Margaret pitied her sisters, but heard that all was going well; that Flora was taking care
      of the elders, and Harry and Mary were making the younger fry very merry at the table on the
      lawn. Dr. May had to start early to see a sick gardener at Drydale before coming on to
      Cocksmoor, and came up to give his daughter a few minutes.
'We get on famously,' he said. 'Ethel does well when she is in for it, like Norman. I had no
      notion what was in the lad. They are perfectly amazed with his speech. It seems hard to give
      such as he is up to those outlandish places—but there, his speech should have taught me
      better—one's best—and, now and then, he seems my best.'
'One comfort is,' said Margaret, smiling, 'you would miss Ethel more.'
'Gallant old King! I am glad she has had her wish—Good-bye, my Margaret, we will think of
      you—I wish—'
'I am very happy,' was Margaret's gentle re-assurance. 'The dear little Daisy looks just as
      her godfather imagined her—' and happy was her face when her father quitted her.
Margaret's next visitor was Meta, who came to reclaim her bonnet, and, with a merry smile,
      to leave word that she was walking on to Cocksmoor. Margaret remonstrated on the heat.
'Let me alone,' said she, making her pretty wilful gesture. 'Ethel and Mary ought to have a
      lift, and I have had no walking to-day.'
'My dear, you don't know how far it is. You can't go alone.'
'I am lying in wait for Miss Bracy, or something innocent,' said Meta. 'In good time—here
      comes Tom.'
Tom entered, declaring that he had come to escape from the clack down-stairs.
'I'll promise not to clack, if you will be so kind as to take care of me to Cocksmoor,' said
      Meta.
'Do you intend to walk?'
'If you will let me be your companion.'
'I shall be most happy,' said Tom, colouring with gratification, such as he might not have
      felt, had he known that he was chosen for his innocence.
He took a passing glimpse at his neck-tie, screwed up the nap of his glossy hat to the
      perfection of its central point, armed himself
       with a knowing little stick, and hurried his fair companion out by the
      back-door, as much afraid of losing the glory of being her sole protector as she was of
      falling in with an escort of as much consequence, in other eyes, as was Mr. Thomas in his
      own.
She knew him less than any of the rest, and her first amusement was, keeping silence to
      punish him for complaining of clack; but he explained that he did not mean quiet, sensible
      conversation—he only referred to those foolish women's raptures over the gabble they had been
      hearing at the Town Hall.
She exclaimed, whereupon he began to criticise the speakers with a good deal of acuteness,
      exposing the weak points, but magnanimously owning that it was tolerable for the style of
      thing, and might go down at Stoneborough.
'I wonder you did not stay away as Harry did.'
'I thought it would be marked,' observed the thread-paper Tom, as if he had been at least
      County member.
'You did quite right,' said Meta, really thinking so.
'I wished to hear Dr. Spencer, too,' said Tom. 'There is a man who does know how to speak!
      He has seen something of the world, and knows what he is talking of.'
'But he did not come near Norman.'
'I hated listening to Norman,' said Tom. 'Why should he go and set his heart on those black
      savages?'
'They are not savages in New Zealand.'
'They are all niggers together,' said Tom, vehemently. 'I cannot think why Norman should
      care for them more than for his own brothers and sisters. All I know is, that if I were my
      father, I would never give my consent.'
'It is lucky you are not,' said Meta, smiling defiance, though a tear shone in her eye. 'Dr.
      May makes the sacrifice with a free heart and willing mind.'
'Everybody goes and sacrifices somebody else,' grumbled Tom.
'Who are the victims now?'
'All of us. What are we to do without Norman? He is worth all of us put together; and I—'
      Meta was drawn to the boy as she had never been before, as he broke off short, his face full
      of emotion, that made him remind her of his father.
'You might go out and follow in his steps,' said she, as the most consoling hope she could
      suggest.
'Not I. Don't you know what is to happen to me? Ah! Flora has not told you. I thought she
      would not think it grand enough. She talked about diplomacy—'
'But what?' asked Meta, anxiously.

'Only that I am to stick to the old shop,' said Tom. 'Don't tell anyone; I would not have
      the fellows know it.'
'Do you mean your father's profession?'
'Aye!'
'Oh! Tom, you don't talk of that as if you despised it?'
'If it is good enough for him, it is good enough for me, I suppose,' said Tom. 'I hate
      everything, when I think of my brothers' going over the world, while I, do what I will, I must
      be tied down to this slow place all the rest of my days.'
'If you were away, you would be longing after it.'
'Yes; but I can't get away.'
'Surely, if the notion is so unpleasant to you, Dr. May would never insist?'
'It is my free choice, and that's the worst of it.'
'I don't understand.'
'Don't you see? Norman told me it would be a great relief to him, if I would turn my mind
      that way—and I can't go against Norman. I found he thought he must, if I did not; and, you
      know, he is fit for all sorts of things that— Besides, he has a squeamishness about him, that
      makes him turn white, if one does but cut one's finger, and how he would ever go through the
      hospitals—'
Meta suspected that Tom was inclined to launch into horrors. 'So you wanted to spare him,'
      she said.
'Aye! and papa was so pleased by my offering, that I can't say a word of the bore it is. If
      I were to back out, it would come upon Aubrey, and he is weakly, and so young, that he could
      not help my father for many years.'
Meta was much struck at the motives that actuated the self-sacrifice, veiled by the sullen
      manner which she almost began to respect. 'What is done for such reasons must make you happy,'
      she said; 'though there may be much that is disagreeable.'
'Not the study,' said Tom. 'The science is famous work. I like what I see of it in my
      father's books, and there's a splendid skeleton at the hospital, that I long to be at. If it
      were not for Stoneborough, it would be all very well; but, if I should get on ever so well at
      the examinations, it all ends here! I must come back, and go racing about this miserable
      circuit, just like your gold pheasant rampaging in his cage, seeing the same stupid people all
      my days.'
'I think,' said Meta, in a low, heartfelt voice, 'it is a noble, beautiful thing to curb
      down your ambition for such causes. Tom, I like you for it.'
The glance of those beautiful eyes was worth having. Tom coloured a little, but assumed his
      usual gruffness.

'I can't bear sick people,' he said.
'It has always seemed to me,' said Meta, 'that few lives could come up to Dr. May's. Think
      of going about, always watched for with hope, often bringing gladness and relief; if nothing
      else, comfort and kindness, his whole business doing good.'
'One is paid for it,' said Tom.
'Nothing could ever repay Dr. May,' said Meta. 'Can anyone feel the fee anything but a mere
      form? Besides, think of the numbers and numbers that he takes nothing from; and, oh! to how
      many he has brought the most real good, when they would have shut their doors against it in
      any other form? Oh! Tom, I think none of you guess how everyone feels about your father. I
      recollect one poor woman saying, after he had attended her brother, "He could not save his
      body, but, surely, ma'am, I think he was the saving of his soul."'
'It is of no use to talk of my being like my father,' said Tom.
Meta thought perhaps not, but she was full of admiration of his generosity, and said, 'Your
      will make it the same work of love, and charity is the true glory.'
Any inroad on Tom's reserved and depressed nature was a benefit; and he was of an age to be
      susceptible of the sympathy of one so pretty and so engaging. He had never been so much
      gratified or encouraged, and, wishing to prolong the tête à tête , he choose to take
      the short cut through the fir-planations, unfrequented on account of the perpendicular, spiked
      railings that divided it from the lane.
Meta was humming-bird enough to be undismayed. She put hand and foot wherever he desired,
      flattered him by letting him handily help her up, and bounded light as a feather down on the
      other side, congratulating herself on the change from the dusty lane to the whispering pine
      woods, between which wound the dark path, bestrewn with brown slippery needle-leaves, and
      edged with the delicate feathering ling and tufts of soft grass.
Tom had miscalculated the chances of interruption. Meta was lingering to track the royal
      high-way of some giant ants to their fir-leaf hillock, when they were hailed from behind, and
      her squire-felt ferocious at the sight of Norman and Harry closing the perspective of
      fir-trunks.
'Hollo! Tom, what a guide you are!' exclaimed Norman. 'That fence which even Ethel and Mary
      avoid!'
'Mary climbs like a cow, and Ethel like a father-long-legs,' said Tom. 'Now, Meta flies like
      a bird.'
'And Tom helped me so cleverly,' said Meta. 'It was an excellent move, to get into the shade
      and this delicious pine-tree fragrance.'
'Halt!' said Norman—'this is too fast for Meta.'

'I cannot,' said Harry. 'I must get there in time to set Dr. Spencer's tackle to rights. He
      is tolerably knowing about knots, but there is a dodge beyond him. Come on, Tom.'
He drew on the reluctant Etonian, who looked repiningly back at the increasing distance
      between him and the other pair, till a turn in the path cut off his view.
'I am afraid you do not know what you have undertaken,' said Norman.
'I am a capital walker. And I know, or do not know, how often Ethel takes the same
      walk.'
'Ethel is no rule.'
'She ought to be,' said Meta. 'To be like her has always been my ambition.'
'Circumstances have formed Ethel.'
'Circumstances! What an ambiguous word! Either Providence pointing to duty, or the world
      drawing us from it.'
'Stepping-stones, or stumbling-blocks.'
'And oh! the difficult question, when to bend them, or to bend to them!'
'There must be always some guiding,' said Norman.
'I believe there is,' said Meta, 'but when trumpet-peals are ringing around, it is hard to
      know whether one is really "waiting beside the tent," or only dawdling.'
'It is great selfdenial in the immoveable square not to join the charge,' said Norman.
'Yes, but they, being shot at, are not deceiving themselves.'
'I suppose self-deception on those points is very common.'
'Especially among young ladies,' said Meta. 'I hear so much of what girls would do, if they
      might, or could, that I long to see them like Ethel—do what they can. And then it strikes me
      that I am doing the same, living wilfully in indulgence, and putting my trust in my own
      misgivings and discontent.'
'I should have thought that discontent had as little to do with you, as with any living
      creature.'
'You don't know how I could growl!' said Meta, laughing. 'Though less from having anything
      to complain of, than from having nothing to complain of.'
'You mean,' he said, pausing, with a seriousness and hesitation that startled her. 'Do you
      mean that this is not the course of life that you would choose?'
A sort of bashfulness made her put her answer playfully, '"All play and no work makes Jack a
      mere toy."' 
'Toys have a kindly mission, and I may be good for nothing
       else; but I would have rather been a coffee-pot than a China shepherdess.'
The gaiety disconcerted him, and he seemed to try to be silent, or to reply in the same
      tone, but he could not help returning to the subject. 'Then you find no charm in the
      refinements to which you have been brought up?'
'Only too much,' said Meta.
He was silent, and fearing to have added to his fine lady impression, she resumed. 'I mean
      that I never could dislike anything, and kindness gives these things a soul; but, of
      course, I should be better satisfied, if I lived harder, and had work to do.'
'Meta!' he exclaimed, 'you tempt me very much! Would you? —No, it is too unreasonable. Would
      you share—share the work that I have undertaken?'
He turned aside and leant against a tree, as if not daring to watch the effect of the
      agitated words that had broken from him. She had little imagined whither his last sayings had
      been tending, and stood still, breathless with the surprise.
'Forgive me,' he said, hastily. 'It was very wrong. I never meant to have vexed you, by the
      betrayal of my vain affection.'
He seemed to be going, and this roused her. 'Stay, Norman,' exclaimed she. 'Why should it
      vex me? I should like it very much, indeed.'
He faced suddenly towards her; 'Meta, Meta! is it possible? Do you know what you are
      saying?'
'I think I do.'
'You must understand me,' said Norman, striving to speak calmly. 'You have been—Words will
      not express what you have been to me for years past, but I thought you too far beyond my
      hopes. I knew I ought to be removed from you—I believed that those who are debarred from
      earthly happiness, are marked for especial tasks. I never intended you to know what actuated
      me, and now the work is undertaken, and—and I cannot turn back—' he added, quickly, as if
      fearing himself.
'No indeed,' was her steady reply.
'Then I may believe it!' cried Norman. 'You do—you will— you deliberately choose to share it
      with me?'
'I will try not to be a weight on you,' answered the young girl, with a sweet mixture of
      resolution and humility. 'It would be the greatest possible privilege. I really do not think I
      am a fine lady ingrain, and you will teach me not to be too unworthy.'
'I? O Meta, you know not what I am. Yet with you, with you to inspire, to strengthen, to
      cheer—Meta, Meta, life is so much changed
       before me, that I cannot understand it yet—after the long dreary
      hopelessness—'
'I can't think why—' Meta had half said, when feminine dignity checked the words,
      consciousness and confusion suddenly assailed her, dyed her cheeks crimson, and stifled her
      voice.
It was the same with Norman, and bashfulness making a sudden prey of both—on they went under
      its dominion, in a condition partaking equally of discomfort and felicity; dreading the sound
      of their own voices, afraid of each other's faces, feeling they were treating each other very
      strangely and ungratefully, yet without an idea what to say next, or the power of speaking
      first; and therefore pacing onwards, looking gravely straight along the path, as if to prevent
      the rabbits and fox-gloves from guessing that anything had been passing between them.
Dr. May had made his call at Drydale, and was driving up a rough lane, between furzey banks,
      leading to Cocksmoor, when he was aware of a tall gentleman on one side of the road and a
      little lady on the other, with the whole space of the cart-track between them, advancing
      soberly towards him.
'Hollo! Why, Meta! Norman! what brings you here? Where are you going?'
Norman perceived that he had turned to the left instead of to the right, and was covered
      with shame.
'That is all your wits are good for. It is well I met you, or you would have led poor Meta a
      pretty dance! You will know better than to trust yourself to the mercies of a scholar another
      time. Let me give you a lift.'
The courteous Doctor sprang out to hand Meta in, but something made him suddenly desire
      Adams to drive on, and then turning round to the two young people, he said, 'Oh!'
'Yes,' said Norman, taking her hand, and drawing her towards him.
'What, Meta, my pretty one, is it really so? Is he to be happy after all? Are you to be a
      Daisy of my own?'
'If you will let me,' murmured Meta, clinging to her kind old friend.
'No flower on earth could come so naturally to us,' said Dr. May. 'And, dear child, at last
      I may venture to tell you that you have a sanction that you will value more than mine. Yes, my
      dear, on the last day of your dear father's life, when some foreboding hung upon him, he spoke
      to me of your prospects, and singled out this very Norman as such as he would prefer.'
Meta's tears prevented all, save the two little words, 'thank you;'
       but she put out her hand to Norman, as she still rested on the Doctor's arm,
      more as if he had been her mother than Norman's father. 'Did he?' from Norman, was equally
      inexpressive of the almost incredulous gratitude and tenderness of his feeling.
It would not bear talking over at that moment, and Dr. May presently broke the silence in a
      playful tone. 'So, Meta, good men don't like heiresses?'
'Quite true,' said Meta, 'it was very much against me.'
'Or it may be the other way,' said Norman.
'Eh? Good men don't like heiresses—here's a man who likes an heiress—therefore here's a man
      that is not good? Ah, ha! Meta, you can see that is false logic, though I've forgotten
      mine.—And pray, Miss, what are we to say to your uncle?'
'He cannot help it,' said Meta, quickly.
'Ha!' said the Doctor, laughing, 'we remember our twenty-one years, do we?'
'I did not mean—I hope I said nothing wrong,' said Meta, in blushing distress. 'Only after
      what you said, I can care for nothing else.'
'If I could only thank him,' said Norman, fervently.
'I believe you know how to do that, my boy,' said Dr. May, looking tenderly at the fairy
      figure between them, and ending with a sigh, remembering, perhaps, the sense of protection
      with which he had felt another Margaret lean on his arm.
The clatter of horses' hoofs caused Meta to withdraw her hand, and Norman to retreat to his
      own side of the lane, as Sir Henry Walkinghame and his servant overtook them.
'We will be in good time for the proceedings,' called out the Doctor. 'Tell them we are
      coming.'
'I did not know you were walking,' said Sir Henry, to Meta.
'It is pleasant in the plantations,' Dr. May answered for her; 'but I am afraid we are late,
      and our punctual friends will be in despair. Will you kindly say we are at hand.'
Sir Henry rode on, finding that he was not to be allowed to walk his horse with them, and
      that Miss Rivers had never looked up.
'Poor Sir Henry!' said Dr. May.
'He has no right to be surprised,' said Meta, very low.
'And so you were marching right upon Drydale!' continued Dr. May, not able to help laughing.
      'It was a happy dispensation that I met you.'
'Oh! I am so glad of it!' said Meta.
'Though to be sure you were disarming suspicion by so cautiously keeping the road between
      you. I should never have guessed what you had been at.'

There was a little pause, then Meta said rather tremulously, 'Please—I think it should be
      known at once.'
'Our idle deeds confessed without loss of time, Miss?'
Norman came across the path, saying, 'Meta is right—it should be known.'
'I don't think uncle Cosham would object, especially hearing it while he is here,' said
      Meta—'and if he knew what you told us.'
'He goes to-morrow, does he not?' said Dr. May.
A silence of perplexity ensued. Meta, brave as she was, hardly knew her uncle enough to
      volunteer, and Norman was privately devising, a beginning by the way of George, when Dr. May
      said, 'Well, since it is not a case for putting Ethel in the forefront, I must e'en get it
      over for you, I suppose.'
'O thank you,' they cried both at once, feeling that he was the proper person in every way,
      and Norman added, 'The sooner the better, if Meta—'
'O yes, yes, the sooner the better,' exclaimed Meta. 'And let me tell Flora—poor dear
      Flora—she is always so kind.'
A testimony that was welcome to Dr. May, who had once, at least, been under the impression
      that Flora courted Sir Henry's attentions to her sister-in-law.
Further consultation was hindered by Tom and Blanche bursting upon them from the common,
      both echoing Norman's former reproach of "A pretty guide!" and while Blanche explained the
      sufferings of all the assembly at their tardiness, Tom, without knowing it, elucidated what
      had been a mystery to the Doctor, namely, how they ever met, by his indignation at Norman's
      having assumed the guidance for which he was so unfit.
'A shocking leader; Meta will never trust him again,' said Dr. May.
Still Blanche thought them not nearly sufficiently sensible of their enormities, and
      preached eagerly about their danger of losing standing room, when they emerged on the moor,
      and beheld a crowd, above whose heads rose the apex of a triangle, formed by three poles,
      sustaining a rope and huge stone.
'Here comes Dr. Spencer,' she said. 'I hope he will scold you.'
Whatever Dr. Spencer might have suffered, he was far too polite to scold, and a glance
      between the two physicians ended in a merry twinkle of his bright eyes.
'This way,' he said, 'we are all ready.'
'But where's my little Daisy?' said Dr. May.
'You'll see her in a minute. She is as good as gold.'
He drew them on up the bank—people making way for them— till he had stationed them among the
      others of their own party,
       beside the deep trench that traced the foundation, around a space that seemed
      far too small.
Nearly at the same moment, began the soft clear sound of chanting wafted upon the wind, then
      dying away—carried off by some eddying breeze, then clear, and coming nearer and nearer. 'I
      will not suffer mine eyes to sleep,    Nor mine eye-lids to slumber: Neither the temples of my
      head to take any rest; Until I find out a place for the Temple of the Lord: An habitation for
      the mighty God of Jacob.' 
Few, who knew the history of Cocksmoor, could help glancing towards the slight girl, who
      stood, with bent head, her hand clasped over little Aubrey's; while, all that was not prayer
      and thanksgiving in her mind, was applying the words to him, whose head rested in the Pacific
      isle, while, in the place which he had chosen, was laid the foundation of the Temple that he
      had given unto the Lord.
There came forth the procession: the Minister choristers, Dr. Spencer as architect, and, in
      her white dress, little Gertrude, led between Harry and Hector, Margaret's special choice for
      the occasion, and followed by the Stoneborough Clergy. 'Let thy Priests be clothed with
      righteousness.' 
It came in well with the gentle, meek, stedfast face of the young Curate of Cocksmoor, as he
      moved on in his white robe, and the sun-light shone upon his fair hair, and calm brow,
      thankful for the past, and hoping, more than fearing, for the future.
The prayers were said, and there was a pause, while Dr. Spencer and the foreman advanced to
      the machine and adjusted it. The two youths then led forward the little girl, her innocent
      face and large blue eyes wearing a look of childish obedient solemnity, only half
      understanding what she did, yet knowing it was something great.
It was very pretty to see her in the midst of the little gathering round the foundation, the
      sturdy workman smiling over his hod of mortar, Dr. Spencer's silver locks touching her flaxen
      curls as he held the shining trowel to her, and Harry's bright head and hardy face, as he
      knelt on one knee to guide the little soft hand, while Hector stood by, still and upright, his
      eyes fixed far away, as if his thoughts were roaming to the real founder.
The Victoria coins were placed—Gertrude scooped up the mass of mortar, and spread it about
      with increasing satisfaction, as it went so smoothly and easily, prolonging the operation,
      till Harry drew her back, while, slowly down creaked the ponderous corner-stone into the bed
      that she had prepared for it, and, with a good will, she gave three taps on it with her
      trowel.
Harry had taken her hand, when, at the sight of Dr. May, she
       broke from him, and, as if taking sudden fright at her own unwonted part, ran,
      at full speed, straight up to her father, and clung to him, hiding her face as he raised her
      in his arms and kissed her.
Meanwhile the strain arose:— 'Thou heavenly, new Jerusalem, Vision of peace, in Prophet's
      dream; With living stones, built up on high, And rising to the starry sky—' 
The blessing of peace seemed to linger softly and gently in the fragrant summer breeze, and
      there was a pause ere the sounds of voices awoke again.
'Etheldred—' Mr. Wilmot stood beside her, ere going to unrobe in the school. 'Etheldred, you
       must once let me say, God bless you for this.'
As she knelt beside her sister's sofa, on her return home, Margaret pressed something into
      her hand. 'If you please, dearest, give this to Dr. Spencer, and ask him to let it be set
      round the stem of the Chalice,' she whispered.
Ethel recognized Alan Ernescliffe's pearl hoop, the betrothal ring, and looked at her sister
      without a word.
'I wish it,' said Margaret, gently. 'I shall like best to know it there.'
So Margaret joined in Alan's offering, and Ethel dared say no more, as she thought how the
      "relic of a frail love lost" was becoming the "token of endless love begun." There was more
      true union in this, than in clinging to the mere tangible emblem—for broken and weak is all
      affection that is not knit together above in the One Infinite Love.
