

CHAPTER XX.CHANGED TACTICS.
 The anarchy which had lasted from the 11th June, 68, when Nero perished, came to an end on
      the 20th December, in the ensuing year. In that terrible year of 69, three emperors had died
      violent deaths, and Rome had been in a condition of disorder on each occasion, and
      intermittent violence had lasted all the time. Men now drew a long breath, they were disposed
      to blot out the memory of those eighteen months of misery and national humiliation, as though
      it had not been, and to reckon the strong Vespasian as prince next after Nero. Indeed, on the
      morrow of the death of Vitellius, when the Senate assembled and decreed the honors of the
      former princes, they recited those of the first Cæsars, but ignored the three last who had
      perished within a twelvemonth, as though they had never been, and were to be forgotten as an
      evil dream. 
 That same day also, Domitian received the title of Cæsar, and was made Prince of the
      Youths, and Præfect of Rome in the place of his uncle, who had been murdered. 
 That day, also, Mucianus arrived with the Syrian legions, and with plenitude of authority
      from Vespasian to act in his name. 
 To Duilia’s vast delight Domitian did not forget his
      obligation to her, but paid frequent visits to her house, and it was a matter of
      pride to her to have his attendant lictors standing outside her door, as in former days. 
 When he came, she made a point of summoning her daughter, and requiring her to be present
      during the interview. But she could not make her speak or compel her to graciousness of manner
      towards the visitor. 
 The young prince’s eyes watched the girl with question in them, but he addressed all his
      conversation to the mother. 
 Longa Duilia did her utmost to disguise her child’s incivility, attributed it to shyness,
      and used all her blandishments to make a visit to her house agreeable to Domitian. 
 At length, the irksomeness caused by Domitia’s irresponsive manner seemed to satisfy the
      mother that she did more harm than good in enforcing her attendance, and she ceased to require
      the girl to appear. 
 Some months passed, and Domitia had not given a thought to Glyceria, and her offer to
      revisit the sick woman, when, all at once, in a fit of weariness with all things that
      surrounded her, and a sense of incapacity to find enjoyment anywhere, she started from her
      languor to bid Eboracus go forth, buy honey-cakes and toys, and accompany her on a visit to
      the Suburra. 
 As she was on her way, Domitian came by with his lictors and other attendants. Since his
      elevation from poverty and insignificance to ease and importance, he had acquired a swagger
      that made his manner more offensive than before in his phase of cubbishness. 
 He at once addressed her, for though veiled he recognized her. 

 “May I attend you? I have at the moment nothing of importance to occupy me.” 
 “I am bound for the Suburra.” 
 “For the Suburra! What can take you into the slums of Rome?” 
 “I am going to see the wife of Paris, the tragic actor.” 
 “Oh! the wife of the actor, Paris,” with a sneer. 
 “I said so—the wife of Paris the actor,” she withdrew her veil and looked him straight in
      the eyes. He winced. 
 “And pray—is she a visiting acquaintance of the family?” 
 “She is our freedwoman. Paris was freed by my father likewise. Are you content? I may add
      that she has met with an accident and is crippled and confined to her bed.” 
 “Oh!” with a vulgar laugh, “and you are infected with the Christian malady, and go among
      the sick and starving.” 
 “I know naught of this Christian malady. What is it?” 
 “We have had the contagion touch us. There is my cousin Clemens, and his wife Domitilla,
      both taken badly with it. He is a poor, mean-spirited fool. He has been offered excellent
      situations, with money to be made in them, in bushels, but he refuses—will not swear by the
      genius of my father, will not offer sacrifice to the Gods. Such thin gruel minds I cannot away
      with. Were I Augustus, such as would not serve the Commonwealth should be sent to kick their
      heels in a desert island. These Christians are the enemies of the human race.” 
 “What, because they visit the sick and relieve the poor?” 

 “The sick are smitten by the Gods and should be left to die. The poor are encumbrances and
      should be left to rot away. But a man of rank and of family—” 
 “Flavius Clemens! of what family?” 
 Domitian bit his lip. The Flavians were of no ancestry; money-lenders, tax-collectors,
      jobbers in various ways, with no connections save through the mother of Vespasian, and that
      middle-class only. 
 “I say that a man who will not serve his country should be pitched out of it.” 
 “About that I have no opinion.” 
 “Clemens was cast to the lions by Nero, but some witchcraft charmed them, and they would
      not touch him.” 
 Domitia said nothing to this. She was desirous of being rid of her self-imposed escort. 
 “You must wish me success,” said the young prince. “I am off to Germany. There has been
      revolt there, and I go to subdue it.” 
 “By all means carry with you a pair of shears.” 
 “What mean you?” 
 “To obtain a crop of golden hair from the German women, wherewith to grace your triumph.” 
 Domitian knitted his brows. 
 “You have a sharp tongue.” 
 “I need one. It is a woman’s sole defence.” 
 “Come, if a cousin, as your mother asserts,—though by the Gods! I know not where the
      kinship comes in,—wish me well. Such words as yours are of ill-omen.” 
 “I wish confusion and destruction to the worst enemies of Rome,” answered Domitia. 
 “That suffices. I will offer the spoils to you.” 
 “Thank you, I do not yet wear wigs.” 

 He turned away with an expression of irritation. 
 “You are either silent, or stick pins into me,” he muttered. 
 Domitia continued her course, but as she entered the “Island” in which was the home of
      Paris, she observed the young Cæsar still in the street, at a corner watching her. 
 Much annoyed, and with her temper ruffled by this meeting, she ascended the steps to the
      first story and at once turned towards the apartments of Paris and Glyceria, but had to thread
      her way among poor people, women weaving and spinning, and children romping and running races. 
 She was welcomed with pleasure, Glyceria would have raised herself, had she been able; as
      it was, she could show her respect only by a salutation with the hand, and her pleasure by a
      smile and a word. 
 The chamber was fragrant with violets. 
 Domitia looked round and saw a small marble table on which stood a statuette of a shepherd
      with panpipes, and a lamb across his shoulders. Violets in a basin stood before the figure. 
 “Ah! Hermes,” said Domitia, and plucking a little bunch of the purple flowers from her
      bosom she laid it in the bowl with the rest. 
 “Nay, dear Lady, not Hermes,” said Glyceria, “though indeed it was sculptured to represent
      him—but to me that figure has another meaning. And I hold your offering of the violets as made
      to Him who to me is the Good Shepherd.”


 “Whom mean you? Atys?” 
 “Not Atys.” 
 Domitia was not particularly interested in the matter. She presumed that some foreign cult
      was followed by Glyceria, and foreign cults at this time swarmed in Rome. 
 “Do you believe me, Glyceria,” said Domitia, “as I came hither, the Cæsar Domitian
      accompanied me, and said that I must be a Christian to care for the sick and suffering. What
      are these Christians?” 
 “I am one,” answered the paralyzed woman. 
 “What! and Paris?” 
 “Nay, he hovers between two opinions. His business holds him and he will not give that up,
      he thinks that, were he to do so, he and I might starve. But with the mind I think he is one.” 
 “And what are these Christians?” 
 “Those who believe in Christ.” 
 “And he?—is that his image?” pointing to the Good Shepherd. 
 “Oh Lady! it is only so much His image as the words Good Shepherd written in characters are
      such, they call up a notion and so does that figure. But in our worship we have no images, no
      sacrifices.” 
 “What is Christianity?” 
 “That is long to answer, but I may say in two words what it is to me.” 
 “Say on.” 
 “The Daylight of the soul.” 
 “How mean you?” 
 “I once was in darkness. I knew not why I was set in the world, whither I was going, what I
      ought to worship, what were my duties, where was right and
      what was wrong. I had no light, no road, no law. Now I have all.” 
 “So every votary of every new religion says. Where is your guarantee that you are not in
      delusion?” 
 “Madam, when the sun rises and there is day, you do not suppose the light, the splendor,
      the confidence inspired by it is a delusion. You know that you see, and see that you may walk,
      and act with purpose and direction. The soul has eyes as well as the body. These eyes behold
      the light and cannot doubt it, by internal conscience that distinguishes between the truth and
      falsehood. By that internal conscience I am assured that the light is as real as that seen by
      eyes of flesh.” 
 “I cannot understand you,” said Domitia. “Now for other matters—I have made Eboracus bring
      you some dainties for yourself and presents for the children who are so kind to you. Where is
      your husband?” 
 “He is rehearsing. Better times have arrived, and he is now occupied.” 
 “And you see less of him.” 
 “Yes—but we must live. When away from me, I know that in heart he is with me.” 
 “You are sure of that?” 
 “Yes.” 
 “What, by the conscience that establishes between truth and falsehood?” 
 “Nay—by trust. We must trust some one and some thing. We trust God, we trust His
      Revelation, we trust in the goodness there is in mankind.” 
 “There is evil rather than good.” 
 “There is good—but that is oft astray because of the darkness, and does not know its
      course.” 
 Domitia did not remain long in the Insula. She
      bade farewell to the wife of the actor and promised to revisit her. The presence
      of Glyceria refreshed, soothed, sweetened the mind of the girl that was heated, ruffled and
      soured by contact with so much there was in pagan life that jarred against her noble
      instincts, by the uncongeniality of her mother, and by the disgust she felt at association
      with Domitian. 
 When she arrived at the palace, she heard that her mother had been inquiring after her, and
      she at once went to her apartments. 
 Duilia asked where she had been, but did not listen for an answer, or pay attention to what
      was said, when the reply came. 
 “What is this I hear?” said Duilia, in a tone of irritation. “Lucilla tells me you have
      been chatting with Domitian, and in the street too——” 
 “I had no wish to speak with him. He came after me.” 
 “Oh! he went after you, did he? And pray what had he to say?” 
 “He is going to Germany to conclude a campaign already fought out and come back and triumph
      for another man’s victories.” 
 “You did not say so to him?” 
 “Not in so many words.” 
 “My dear, it is true. He is going, and whether he be successful or not, will return wearing
      the title Germanicus. I shall have a little supper.” 
 “For whom?” 
 “For whom, do you ask? For him to be sure, to wish him good success on the expedition.” 
 “You will allow me not to be present.” 
 “As you will, perverse girl. My dear,” in a confidential tone, “if kittens can’t catch
      rats, cats can.” 
