
CHAPTER I.AN APPEAL.
 “What can I do for thee, Domitia?” asked Titus, who was pacing the room; he halted before
      the young wife of his brother, who was kneeling on the mosaic floor. 
 She had taken advantage of her introduction into the Imperial palace to make an appeal to
      Titus, now Emperor. She had not been allowed to appear there during the reign of Vespasian. 
 Titus was a tall, solidly built man, with the neck of a bull; he had the same vulgarity of
      aspect that characterized both his father and brother, and which was also conspicuous in his
      daughter Julia. The whole Flavian family looked, what it was, of ignoble origin,—there was
      none of the splendid beauty that belonged to Augustus, and to the Claudian family that
      succeeded. Their features were fleshy and coarse, their movements without grace, their address
      without dignity. 
 If they attempted to be gracious, they spoiled the graciousness by clumsiness in the act;
      if they did a generous thing, it carried its shadow of meanness trailing behind it. 
 Titus had not borne a good character before his elevation to the purple. He had indulged in
      coarse vices, had shown himself callous toward human suffering. Yet there was in his muddy
      nature a spark of good
      feeling, a desire to do what was right, a rough sense of justice and much family
      affection. 
 It was a disappointment to him that he had but one child, a daughter, a gaunt, stupid girl,
      big-boned, amiable and ugly. 
 He knew that Domitian, his younger brother, would in all probability succeed him, but he
      also was childless. Next to him, the nearest of male kin, were the sons of that Flavius
      Sabinus, who had been butchered by the Vitellians, and their names were Sabinus and Clemens. 
 The former was much liked by the people, he was an upright grave man. The second was
      regarded with distrust, as a Christian. It was not the fact of his following a strange
      religion that gave offence. To that Romans were supremely indifferent, but that which they
      could not understand and allow was a man withdrawing himself from the public service, the
      noblest avocation of a man, because he scrupled to worship the image of the Emperor, and to
      swear by his genius. They regarded this as a mere excuse to cover inertness of character, and
      ignobility of mind. 
 For the like reason, Christians could not attend public banquets or go to private
      entertainments as the homage done to the gods, and the idolatrous offerings associated with
      them, stood in their way. The profession of Christianity, accordingly, not only debarred from
      the public service, but interfered with social amenities. Such withdrawal from public social
      life the Romans could not understand, and they attributed this conduct to a morbid hatred
      entertained by the Christians for their fellow-men. 
 The public shows were either brutal or licentious. The Christians equally refused to be
      present at the gladiato
      rial combats and at the coarse theatrical representations of broad comedy and low
      buffoonery. This also was considered as indicative of a gloomy and unamiable spirit. 
 There were indeed heathen men who loathed the frightful butchery in the arena, such was the
      Emperor Tiberius,—and Pliny in his letters shows us that to some men of his time they were
      disgusting, but nevertheless they attended these exhibitions, as a public duty, and contented
      themselves with expressing objection to them privately. The objection was founded on taste,
      not principle, and therefore called for no public expression of reprobation. 
 Clemens was quite out of the question as a successor. If he was too full of scruple to take
      a prætorship, he was certainly unfit to be an emperor. Not so Flavius Sabinus his elder
      brother. Him accordingly, Domitian looked upon with jealousy. 
 “What can I do for thee?” again asked Titus, and his heavy face assumed a kindly
      expression; “my child, I know that thou hast had trouble and art mated to a fellow with a
      gloomy, uncertain humor; but what has been done cannot be undone——” 
 “Pardon me,” interrupted Domitia, “it is that I desire; let me be separated from him. I
      never, never desired to leave my true husband, Lamia, I was snatched away by violence—let me
      go back.” 
 “What! to Lamia! That will hardly do. Would he have thee?” 
 “Tainted by union with Domitian, perhaps not!” exclaimed Domitia fiercely. “Right indeed—he
      would not.” 
 “Nay, nay,” said Titus, his brow clouding, “such a word as that is impious, and in another
      would be trea
      son. Domitia, you have a bitter tongue. I have heard my brother say as much. But
      I cannot think that Lamia would dare to receive thee again after having been the wife of a
      Flavian prince.” 
 Domitia’s lip curled, but she said nothing. These upstart Flavians made a brag of their
      consequence. 
 “Then,” said she, “let me go to my old home at Gabii. I have lived in seclusion enough at
      Albanum to find Gabii in the current of life—and my mother and her many friends will come
      there anon. Let me go. Let there be a divorce—and I will go home and paddle on the lake and
      pick flowers and seek to be heard of no more.” 
 “It would not do for you and Lamia to be married again. It would be a political error; it
      might be dangerous to us Flavians.” 
 “I should have supposed, in your brand-new divinity that a poor mouse like myself could not
      have scratched away any of the newly-laid-on gold leaf.” 
 “Domitia,” said Titus, who had resumed his walk, “be careful how you let that tongue act—it
      is a file, it has already removed some of the gilding.” 
 A smile broke out on his face at first inclined to darken. 
 “There! There!” said he, laughing; “I am not a fool. I know well enough what we were, as I
      feel what we have become. Caligula threw mud, the mud of Rome, into the lap of my grandfather,
      because he had not seen to the efficient scouring of the streets. It was ominous—the soil of
      Rome has been taken away from the divine race of Julius—and has been cast into the lap of us
      money-lenders, pettyfogging attorneys of Reate. Well! the Gods willed it, Domitia—it is
      necessary for us to make a display.” 

 “Push, as my mother would say.” 
 “Well—push—as you will it. But, understand, Domitia, though I am not ignorant of all this,
      I don’t like to have it thrown in my teeth; and my brother is more sensitive to this than
      myself. Domitia, I will do this for you. I will send for him, and see if I can induce him to
      part from you. I mistrust me,”—Titus smiled, looked at Domitia, with one finger stroked her
      cheek, and said,—“By the Gods! I do not wonder at it. I would be torn by wild horses myself
      rather than abandon you, had I been so fortunate——” 
 “Sire, so wicked——” 
 “Well, well! you must excuse Domitian. Love, they say, rules even the Gods, and is stronger
      than wine to turn men’s heads.” 
 He clapped his hands. A slave appeared. “Send hither the Cæsar,” he ordered. The slave
      bowed and withdrew. 
 Domitian entered next moment. He must have been waiting in an adjoining apartment. 
 “Come hither, brother,” said Titus. “I have a suppliant at my feet, and what suppose you
      has been her petition?” 
 Domitian looked down. He had a pouting disdainful lip, a dogged brow, and eyes in which
      never did a sparkle flash; but his face flushed readily, not with modesty, but shyness or
      anger. 
 “Brother,” said Domitian, “I know well enough at what she drives. From the moment, the
      first moment I knew her, she has treated me to quip and jibe and has sought to keep me at a
      distance. I know not whether she use a love-philtre so as to hold me? I know not if it be her
      very treatment of me which makes
      me love her the more. Love her! It is but the turning of a hair whether I love or
      hate her most. I know what is her petition without being told, and I say—I refuse consent.” 
 “Listen to what I have to propose,” said Titus, “and do not blurt out your family quarrels
      before I speak about them. It is not I only, but all Rome, that knows that your life together
      is not that of Venus’s doves. It is unpleasant to me, it detracts from the dignity of the
      Flavian family”—he glanced aside at his sister-in-law, and his lips quivered, “that this
      cat-and-dog existence should become the gossip of every noble house, and a matter of
      tittle-tattle in every wine-shop. Make an end to it and repudiate her.” 
 Domitian kept his eyes on the floor. Domitia looked at him for his answer with eagerness.
      He turned on her with a vulgar laugh and said:— 
 “Vixen! I see thee—naught would give thee greater joy than for me to assent. I should see
      thee skip for gladness of heart, as I have never seen thee move thy little feet since thou
      hast been with me! I should hear thee laugh—and I have heard no sound save flout from thee as
      yet. I should see a sun dance in thine eyes, that perpetually lower or are veiled in tears. Is
      it not so?”—He paused and looked at her with truculence in his face—“and therefore, for that
      alone, I will not consent.” 
 “Listen further to me, Domitian,” said Titus; “I have a proposition to make. Separate from
      Domitia, send her back——” 
 “What, into the arms of Lamia?” 
 “No, to Gabii. She shall be guarded there, she shall not remarry Lamia.” 
 “I shall take good heed to that.” 
 “Hear me out, Domitian. I have but one child,
      Julia. The voice of the people has proclaimed itself well pleased with our house.
      We have given to Rome peace and prosperity at home, and victory abroad. I believe that there
      are few who regard me unfavorably. But it is not so with thee. Thy folly, thy disorders, thy
      violence, before our father came to Rome, have not been forgotten or forgiven, and Senate and
      people look on thee with mistrust. I will give thee Julia to wife. It is true she is thy
      niece—but since Claudius took Agrippina——” 
 “Thanks, Titus, I have no appetite for mushrooms.”

 “Tut! you know Julia, a good-hearted jade.” 
 “I will not consent,” said Domitian surlily. 
 “Hear me out, brother, before making thy decision. If thou wilt not take Julia, then I
      shall give her to another——” 
 “To whom?” asked Domitian looking up. He at once perceived that a danger to himself lurked
      behind this proposal. The husband of Julia might contest his claims to the throne, should the
      popularity of Titus grow with years, and his own decline. 
 “I shall give her to our cousin, Flavius Sabinus.” 
 Domitian was silent, and moved his hands and feet uneasily. 
 Looking furtively out of the corners of his eyes, he saw a flash of hope in those of
      Domitia. 
 He held up his head, and looking with leaden eyes at his brother, said:— 
 “Still I refuse.” 
 “The consequences—have you considered them?” 
 Domitian turned about, and made a tiger-like leap at Domitia and catching her by her
      shoulders said:— 
 “I hate her. I will risk all, rather than let her go free.” 


