

CHAPTER XXII.QUONIAM TU CAIUS, EGO CAIA!
 At the earliest rays of dawn the auguries were taken, not as of old by the flight of birds,
      but by inspection of the liver and heart of a sheep, that was slaughtered for the purpose by
      the Aruspices, and this done they came to the palace of Duilia, bearing the skin of the sheep,
      to announce that the portents were favorable, in fact, were of extraordinarily good promise. 
 “That is as I hoped,” said Longa Duilia, “and that will counteract and bring to naught the
      disastrous tokens of the wreath. Why, by Venus’s girdle, the girl has not been able to get her
      hands white yet. The stain of that nefast herb is on them still. But—ah! here she comes in her
      flame-colored veil. By the Body of Bacchus! after all it means no ill, for do not her hands
      agree in hue with her head-gear?”

 Domitia had laid aside her maidenly dress, the toga prætextata woven
      with horizontal stripes, for the dress of a married woman, the toga recta,
      with vertical stripes. About her waist was a woollen girdle fastened in a peculiar manner,
      with the so-called knot of Hercules, that was regarded as a charm against the evil eye, and
      was also employed in binding up wounds and fractured bones. The girl’s dress, as well as a net
      of red silk
      threads in which her hair had been tied up on the previous day, had been offered
      on the altars of the ancestral deities worshipped in the house. 
 Her hair had been divided that morning, not by a comb, but by the head of a lance, into six
      tresses that were plaited with colored ribbons. And about her head, beneath the veil, was the
      virgin’s wreath woven out of the flowers she had herself picked—but the ill-omened cypress and
      the blood distilling androsœmum had been omitted.

 And now with pipes and cymbals came the bridegroom attended by all his friends, to fetch
      the bride home. The house door was decorated with laurels, and incense smoked on the domestic
      altars, in the vestibule, and in the atrium. The boxes that contained the ancestral wax masks
      were open, and each face was wreathed about with flowers. Green lines connecting the boxes
      united all to one trunk forming a family tree. The household gods were not ignored, lamps
      burned before them, flowers adorned their heads, and cakes and wine were placed on shelves
      below them. 
 Slaves ran to and fro, and ran against each other. Ten witnesses, kinsmen of the bride and
      bridegroom, assembled to take cognizance of the marriage contract. Two seats were introduced
      into the hall, and the legs bound together, and over both was spread the skin of the sheep
      slaughtered that morning for the auspices. 
 Then bride and bridegroom were seated on these stools, the marriage contract was read
      aloud, and they received the salutations of their friends. The
pronuba, a married female relative united their hands, and that
      accomplished, the bridegroom rose, and attended by the friends and kinsfolk of both parties,
      departed for
      the Temple of Jupiter, where the flamen Dialis offered sacrifice to the gods of
      marriage, to Jupiter, Juno, Tellus, and the old Latin half-forgotten deities of Picumnus and
      Pilumnus. 
 Whilst the sacred sacrifice was being performed, in the house of the bride all was being
      made ready for the wedding or meal after midday. 
 The bride was now esteemed to have passed out of the family of her father into that of her
      husband, his gods would be her gods, his house her house, his name hers. In signification of
      this the formula was used by her, “Since thou art Caius, I am Caia.” At a remote period it
      would have been “Since thou art Lucius I am Lucia,” and she would have lost her name of
      Domitia. But this was no longer customary, only the liturgical form of surrender was employed. 
 It was past noon when the procession returned, swelled by more friends and by all
      well-wishers, and as it entered the house, with a shiver Domitia observed the glowing face and
      water-blue eyes of the young prince, attended by his lictors. She caught his glance, but he
      dropped his eyes the moment they encountered hers, and she saw his cheeks pucker, as though
      with laughter. But she had no time to give thought to him; she was required to acknowledge the
      felicitations of the visitors, and to entreat them to partake of the hospitality of the hour,
      and to offer a pinch of incense and a libation to her happiness. 
 The supper was lengthy—many partook and came in relays, so that the entire afternoon was
      consumed by it. To the relief of Domitia, the prince Domitian had withdrawn. As each left the
      table he saluted the bride with the exclamation, Feliciter. 

 For this long and tedious ceremonial feast, she was allowed to rest on a couch, next to her
      husband, at the table, in the place of honor. 
 The meal lasted till evening, and then there ensued a movement. 
 The household goods of the bride, her spindle and distaff, her chest containing robes, were
      brought forth, and placed on biers to be conveyed to the new house. 
 Then Domitia rose, with tears in her eyes, and went to the several chambers she had
      occupied, to say farewell to the kitchen, to salute the hearth, to the shelf that served as
      chapel, to bid farewell to the ancestral gods, to the wax forefathers in the hall, then to
      kiss her mother, finally to turn, kneel and embrace the doorposts of the paternal dwelling,
      and kiss the threshold from which she parted. 
 Without, the procession waited. She was gently disengaged from her mother’s arms, and to
      the cries of Talasse! amidst a shower of walnuts thrown among the boys by
      the bridegroom, the procession started. 
 Domitia was attended by three lads, one went before carrying a torch, the other two walked,
      one on each side, carrying spindle and distaff. The torch, according to rule, was of
      whitethorn wood, and on arrival at the house of the bridegroom would be scrambled for and
      ripped to pieces by the guests, as every shred was esteemed to carry good luck. 
 Now rose a burst of song, the so-called Fescennian lays, some old and some new, accompanied
      by the flutes of musicians and the clash of castanets and cymbals of dancing girls. 
 The procession descended the hill to the Forum, crowds lining the way and shouting
       Feliciter! 

 At a corner there was a little clearing, for there lay a pallet, and on it a sick woman,
      who had been brought from her dwelling to see the sight. She extended and waved her hand,
      holding something as Domitia approached, and the bride through her tears noticed her, halted,
      went towards her, and said:— 
 “Glyceria! you here to wish me happiness!” 
 “And to give thee, dear lady, a little present.” 
 She extended to her a small amulet, that Domitia accepted gratefully, and stooping kissed
      the paralyzed woman on the brow. 
 An unheard-of thing! unparalleled! A thing she would not have done, had she been in full
      control over herself—a thing she would not have done, had not her heart brimmed with love for
      all, at that moment. She, a noble lady, belonging to one of the greatest houses in Rome,
      kissed a poor actor’s wife, an enfranchised slave—and that before all eyes. 
 About Glyceria was a dense throng of men and women and children, the occupants of the
      “Island” in which she lived. It was they, who, pitying her sufferings, desirous that she
      should see the procession, had opened a space before her, and held it open, that none might
      impede a full view of the marriage train. 
 And this throng of rude artisans, shoemakers, cordwainers, leather-sellers, hawkers and
      their wives and children saw this act of Domitia. For a moment they were silent, and then they
      broke into a roar of “Feliciter! feliciter! the Gods be with thee, dear lady! The Gods protect
      thee! The Gods shower blessings on thee!” 
 But Domitia might not tarry; confused, half ashamed of what she had done, half carried off
      her feet by the thrill of joy that went from the crowd to her, she advanced. 

 The train descended by the lake of Nero, now occupied by the Colosseum, then ascended the
      Celian Hill to the house of Lamia. 
 On reaching his door, the procession spread out, and gave space for the bride to advance. 
 Modestly, trembling with love, timidity, hope in her heart, she anointed the doorposts with
      oil and then passed woollen strings round them. 
 This accomplished, two young men started forward, caught her up, made a seat for her of
      their hands, and bore her over the threshold, which she might not touch with her feet, lest by
      accident or nervousness she should stumble, and so her entry into the new house be ill-omened.
      On being admitted into the habitation of her husband, it was her duty to go to the hearth and
      make up the fire, then to the fountain and draw water; next to worship the household gods. 
 The house was pretty. It had been fresh painted, and was bright with color, and sweet with
      flowers, for every pillar was wreathed and each door garlanded. Numerous lamps illumined the
      chambers, and in the atrium were reflected in the water tank. The air was vibrating with
      music, as choirs sang Fescennian songs, and timbrels tinkled and pipes twittered. 
 Domitia was received by the wife of L. Ælius Lamia, who had adopted Domitia’s husband. He
      was a quiet man, who had no ambition, had taken no offices, and had passed his time in taming
      birds. He was the son of a better known man, who had been a friend of Horace. 
 The old woman, gentle in manner, took Domitia by the hand and led her into the tablinum,
      where was old Lamia, a cripple through gout, and he kissed the girl, patted her hands and
      spoke an affectionate welcome. 

 “Claudia and I,” said he, “were childless and so we adopted Lucius. He has been a good son
      to us, and this is a happy day to all three,—to him who has secured the sweetest flower of
      Rome, and to Claudia and me who obtain so good a daughter. But, ah! we are old and have our
      humors, I, with my gout, am liable to be peevish. You must bear with our infirmities. You will
      have a worthy husband, one cut out of the old rock of which were the ancient Romans, and not
      of the Tiberine mud of which the present generation are moulded.” 
 “Come now,” said the old woman, “the guests are about to depart, bid them farewell.” 
 Then she led the young girl back into the atrium. 
 There stood the Chaldæan, dark, stern, ominous. 
 Domitia in exuberant joy smiled at him, and said: 
 “Elymas! You see my happiness. Isis has for once been in error—we, my Lamia and I, are
      united, and there have been no hands thrust forth to part us.” 
 “My lady,” said the astrologer, “the day is not yet over.” 
 “And the auguries were all propitious.” 
 “The promise of the augurs may not jump with thy desire,” he replied. 
 She had no time for more words, as her hand was caught by L. Ælius Lamia, who drew her
      aside into the lararium or chapel. 
 “My dearest,” he said, “this is a day of trial to thee—but we shall be left undisturbed
      shortly. The guests depart and the riot will cease.” 
 She looked at him, with eyes that brimmed with tears, and a sob relieved her heart, as she
      cast herself on his breast and said:— 
 “Quoniam tu Caius, ego Caia.” 
