

CHAPTER XXIV.ALBANUM.
 Sleep-drunk, with clouded brain, eyes that saw as in a dream, feet that moved
      involuntarily, Domitia descended from the litter and tottered in at a doorway when informed
      that she had reached her destination. 
 Where that was she did not care, whose house this was mattered nothing to her in her then
      condition of weariness. 
 Female slaves bearing lights received her and directed her steps to a chamber where they
      would have divested her of her garments and put her to bed, had she not refused their
      assistance, thrown herself on the couch and in a moment fallen fast asleep. 
 The slaves looked at each other, whispered, and resolved not to torment by rousing her;
      they accordingly drew the heavy curtains of the doorway and left her to her slumbers. 
 But weary though Domitia was, her sleep was not dreamless, the song of a thousand
      nightingales that made the night musical reached her ears and penetrated the doorways of her
      troubled brain and wove fantasies; the ever-present sense of fear, not dissipated by slumber,
      weighed on her and gave sombre color to her dreams; the motion of the palanquin had
      communicated itself in her fancy, to the bed, and that
      tossed and swayed under her. Her weary feet seemed stung and burnt as though they
      had been held too close to the fire. Now she saw Lamia’s face, and then it was withdrawn; now
      her mother seemed to be calling to her from an ever-increasing distance. 
 Yet troubled though her sleep was, it afforded her brain some rest, and she woke in the
      morning at a later hour than usual, when by the strip of warm light below the curtains she was
      made aware that the sun had risen. 
 She started from sleep, passed her hand across her face, pressed her brows, stepped to the
      doorway, pushed the curtains aside and looked out into a little atrium, in which plashed a
      fountain, and where stood boxes of myrtles in full flower, steeping the atmosphere with
      fragrance. 
 At once two female servants came to her, bowed low and desired permission to assist in
      dressing her. 
 With some hesitation she consented. 
 “Where am I?” she asked. 
 “By the lake of Alba,” answered a dark-faced servant with hard lustrous eyes, and in a
      foreign dialect. 
 “In whose house?” 
 The slaves looked at each other, and made no reply. 
 Again she put the question. 
 “Lady, we are forbidden to say,” answered one of the slaves. 
 “At Alba?” muttered Domitia. 
 Then, as the woman divested her of her tunic, something fell from her bosom on the mosaic
      floor. The maid stooped, picked it up and handed it to Domitia, who turned it in her palm and
      looked at it, at first without comprehension. Then she recollected what
      this was—the amulet given her by Glyceria. It was a red cornelian fish pierced at
      one end and a fine gold ring inserted in the hole, so that the stone might be suspended. 
 Domitia was not in a condition of mind to pay attention to the ornament, but she bade one
      of the servants thread a piece of silk through the ring that she might wear the amulet about
      her neck, and then she allowed herself to be conducted to the bath. 
 With suspicious eyes the girl observed everything. She was obviously in a country villa
      belonging to some Roman noble, and that villa beside the Alban Lake. 
 The Ælii Lamiæ had no country-house at this place, of that she was aware. She had heard
      some of the friends of her mother speak of the beauties of the Alban Lake, and then her mother
      had lamented that the family estate lay by the Gabian puddle. But she could not recall that
      any one of them had a villa there. 
 When she left the bath she walked out of the doorway through the vestibule and stood on the
      terrace. 
 Below was the sombre lake, almost circular, with the rolling woods of oak and beech flowing
      down the slopes to the very water’s edge, here and there the green covering interrupted by
      precipitous crags of tuffa. Yonder was the great ridge on which gleamed white the Temple of
      Jupiter Latiaris, the central shrine of the Latin races, the great pilgrimage place to which
      the country people turned in every distress. 
 She had not previously seen the Alban Lake, although Gabii had been her residence for some
      months, and that was seated on a low spur of the mountains, in the crater of one of which
      slept this tranquil and lovely sheet of water. But she knew enough about it by
      hearsay to be sure that she was not misinformed by the slaves as to where she now
      was. She certainly was beside that lake, near which once stretched Alba Longa, the cradle of
      the Roman race—a race of shepherds driven from its first seat by volcanic fires, to settle
      beside the Tiber on the Palatine Hill. 
 That road along which she had been conveyed during the night was the great Appian Way. It
      could have been none other, and that led, as she was aware, along the spurs of the Alban
      mountains. 
 She walked the terrace, her brow moist with anxious thought. 
 Why had she been carried off? 
 By whom had she been swept as by a hurricane from her husband’s side? 
 A sense of numbness was on her brain still, caused by the shock. To Lucius Lamia her heart
      had turned with the reverence she had borne to her father, with the sweetness and glow of
      girlish love for one who would be linked with her by a still nearer tie. She could not realize
      that she was parted from Lamia finally, irrevocably. She was in a waking dream: a dream of
      great horror, but yet a dream that would roll away and reality would return. She would wake
      from it in the arms of her dear husband, looking into his eyes, clinging to his heart, hearing
      his words soothing her mind, allaying her terrors. 
 If at this time she could have conceived that to be possible which nevertheless was to take
      place, she would have run to the lake and plunged into its blue waters. 
 Singularly enough no thought of the vision in the temple of Isis recurred to her. Possibly
      she was in too
      stunned a condition of mind; possibly the effects of the narcotic still hung
      about her, like the vapors that trail along the landscape after a storm of rain at the break
      of the weather. No thought of hers connected this outrage with Domitian. This was due to the
      impression produced in her by conversation with her mother, who, she believed, was designing
      to secure Domitian for herself. 
 Moreover, the young prince had never shown her any favor. He had studiously neglected her,
      that he might address himself to Duilia. He had taunted her, sneered at her, but never spoken
      to her words that might be construed as a declaration of love. She recalled how she had urged
      her mother to expel him from the house when he sought refuge there; how she had sought to
      thrust him forth to certain death, to deny him the rights of hospitality. Such was enough to
      provoke resentment, not to awaken love. Her mother, on the other hand, had bound him to her by
      the tie of gratitude, for she had saved him at that time of extreme peril. 
 Seeing the dark slave girl, Domitia signed to her to approach, and asked: 
 “Where are some of my family? Is not Euphrosyne here—or Eboracus?” 
 “Lady—none came with you save the servants of our master.” 
 “And he?” 
 “Madam, I may not say.” 
 “There is that Magus, Elymas; send him to me.” 
 After some delay the sorcerer appeared, and approached, bowed and stood silent with hands
      crossed on his breast. 

 “Elymas,” said Domitia, “I require you to enlighten me. What is the meaning of this? Why
      have I been carried away to Albanum? By whose orders has this been done?” 
 He bowed again—paused, and then, with obvious uneasiness in his manner replied:— 
 “Destiny will be fulfilled.” 
 “What mean you? Destiny! some drive it before them as a wheelbarrow, and such seem you to
      be. Why am I here and not in Lamia’s house in Rome?” 
 “Did you not, lady, behold in vision that which was to be?” 
 She started, lost color and shivered. 
 “What mean you?” 
 “The purple.” 
 “The purple! I desire no purple. You speak enigmatically. You have acted a treacherous part
      in forwarding this act of violence. I have been snatched from my dear husband’s side, the Gods
      who gave me to him have been outraged, I—I, a member of a noble house, a daughter of Domitius
      Corbulo, have been treated as though the prey of a party of slave-hunters. What next? Am I to
      be taken into the market-place, and sold by auction? Or am I carried off by freebooters—to be
      let go for a price? Name me the captain of this robber band, and the price at which I may be
      ransomed. I promise it shall be paid. But that condign chastisement be inflicted for this
      insult, that I will also guarantee. I thank the Gods, Rome is not on the confines of the
      world, that these deeds can be perpetrated with impunity. We are not at Nizibis or Edessa to
      be fallen upon by Parthians, or held to ransom by Armenians——” 

 “Young lady,” said the Magian, “your words are high-sounding, but your threats are such as
      cannot be executed, nor is any price asked for your redemption. When you set your foot on the
      Clivus Scauri, it is a narrow way, between high walls—and there is no option, you must go on.
      You cannot turn aside to right or left.” 
 “I can turn back.” 
 “The way is broken up behind. You must go forward.” 
 “Whither?” 
 “Look!” 
 A number of male slaves came forth from the villa; they were in white. 
 “Do you know that livery?” asked the sorcerer. 
 Then Domitia uttered a cry of despair, and threw herself on the ground. Now she did know
      where she was, in whose power she was, and how hopeless it was for her to expect to escape. 
 The white was the Imperial livery. 


