
CHAPTER VI.
"My engagements never do seem to go right," sighed the musician.
He was sitting in the little bedroom upstairs by the side of his sleeping son, with his thumb
     tightly clasped in a fat brown hand. But he was not thinking of Sonny, although the clasp of
     the tiny fingers was comforting, as betokening some one who still believed in him.
"There is a curse upon my love affairs," said the musician. "Why should those letters never
     reach her? And why did she choose that moment of all others to come back? Another man might do
     a dirty trick and not be found out. God knows I never wanted to harm a woman in my life, least
     of all those two; and yet I've blundered in and got engaged to both of them at once; and I've
     broken the heart of the purest and most innocent child—merciful heavens, what haven't I done?
     And here I am, left up here like a great fool, while they are tearing my character to ribbons
     downstairs. Was there ever such an unfortunate brute as myself?"
The musician's voice became husky, whether from self-pity, or from the recollection of the
     poor little scared face of the child who had found her happiness only to lose it again, it
     would be impossible to say.
"Women are such deuced odd things," continued the musician, complainingly; "they expect you
     to look on while they scratch one another's eyes out, and then if you touch a hair of their
     heads you have the whole lot of them against you. Bless her! I would give my life to undo what
     I have done to her to-day."
Which did he mean? Perhaps he hardly knew. But Lady Joan did all the while that she sat by
     Norah Bisley on the horse-hair sofa, downstairs in the oak-panelled parlor.
The child stirred in his sleep.
"Happy Sonny," murmured the musician, sentimentally, "your turn has yet to come. Why can't
     children always remain children? Norah ought never to have grown up; she was meant for eternal
     childhood. It was a mistake to make Lady Joan a child at all, she ought to have been born a
     full-grown woman. I ought never to have been born at all, of course. Who arranges
     these things?"
Then he went to the table by the window, and cleared it of Sonny's monkey without a tail, and
     the fat pink pin-cushion, and the pale green glass pot with a lid, and the shining porcelain
     shepherdess with a chipped crook, and the knitted toilet-cover that entrapped the legs of all
     these ornaments, and sat down to write the best song he had ever composed, to some words by
     George Meredith.
"Men are always brutes," said Lady Joan, "but this one has only become so by accident. Stupid
     people do more harm than bad ones, ever so much. The fates will help you out of a hole if you
     have been a clever sinner, but they will lay a pitfall for you if you are a blundering,
     good-intentioned sort of creature. The fact is, this world of ours was made for clever people,
     and the fools haven't a chance. That is why he has gone wrong."
"Is he a fool then?" asked the weary voice on the sofa. One disillusionment more than another
     did not matter now that her idol was broken.
"He lives by his emotions, and he has no sense of proportion. It comes to the same thing. He
     had no intention of being faithless to you, and if you had not gone away he would have married
     you, and remained dull and virtuous to the end of his days. But you did go away, and I came
     home; and he can't live without a woman, and so he persuaded himself that his friendship for me
     was love. That was how it was done. Perhaps I encouraged him too. He was interesting to me, and
     he was never in love with me, so I amused myself by trying to fascinate him. I can't help being
     a woman."
"Are women like that too?" thought the other, and she added out loud, "I am a woman too,
     but—" and left her sentence unfinished.
"No, you are not a woman, you are only a child," said Lady Joan; "the world is a place for
     you to play in. You were born to be happy, and you will never have to realize the things I have
     been telling you."
"I shall never be happy again," said the tired voice, with a sob.
"We all say that at eighteen; it comforts us sometimes to be the most miserable person in the
     world. Then we turn round a bit, and the sun comes out again, and some one gives us a tonic,
     and we endow a cot at the hospital, or give a farthing meal to five hundred brats in the East
     End, and then we go on again. You have never been in love before, of course?"
"Don't," moaned the other from the corner of the unsympathetic sofa.
The clear calm tones of her Mentor softened a little.
"I don't want to hurt you, Norah; I only mean that if you go in for loving once in a lifetime
     and that sort of thing, you really cannot properly understand the utter insouciance of an
     emotional man like Digby. He will love you more than ever now that you have come back, and you
     will be ten times happier than if you had been married straight off without any drawbacks. You
     have got rid of your ideals, to begin with, which most of them do not accomplish until after
     marriage, and that is always a risk. And you will find there is lots of time to be happy."
"Oh," said the other, in an altered tone, sitting upright, and speaking with startling
     emphasis, "and do you really mean to say that you think I should marry him now?"
Lady Joan did not turn a hair, vulgarly speaking; she felt she had done wonders already by
     getting rid of the battered, hopeless little voice, and she merely smiled to herself in the
     twilight in a triumphant, self-satisfied manner.
"You are to come home with me now, and I will send down for your maid, and you shall stay the
     night and get rested. I suppose you have eaten nothing for hours? Then how can you expect to
     take a proper view of things? Half the troubles of life come from a bad digestion; it's not
     romantic, but then I don't belong to your musical set."
And she carried Norah off through the back door, leaving Mrs. Haxtell with material for a
     year's gossip, and a note for the musician to the effect that he was to come up to the Court
     after dinner and give them some music.
"That is the cleverest woman I know," he sputtered, as he plunged his head into a basin of
     cold water after reading the scrawled scrap of paper. And he added grimly, "I suppose she will
     tell me which one I am to marry. And I am not in a position to object."
But he felt grateful to her for asking him in such a commonplace sort of way, and he put the
     song he had been writing into the pocket of his Inverness coat, and walked up to the Court in
     the dusk.
She was just as commonplace in her greeting. He found them in the big drawing-room near the
     open window, and he had to walk the whole length of the room before they took any notice of the
     butler's announcement, or turned round. Lady Joan was knitting a large white shawl, and talking
     vigorously; Norah was lying silently on a couch, with her great sentimental eyes looking out
     into the garden; and the curate, who had also dropped in after dinner, was sipping his coffee
     and listening deferentially to his hostess.
"Of course, indifference is the characteristic of the times, as you say, Mr. Johnson, but I
     am not sure that it matters much. There is not much to choose between the negative virtue of
     the present day and the positive wickedness of our forefathers."
Mr. Johnson ventured the unavoidable reply that negative virtue was worse than positive
     wickedness, because it professed more.
"That is true, but we must continue to be miserable sinners in some way or other, or else the
     Litany would have to be expunged, and that would offend the Conservatives," said Lady Joan,
     with a flippancy which was merely to hide the fact that she was feeling what women call
     overwrought; and she turned to Digby to conceal her consciousness of having been extravagant
     instead of witty. "Ah, Mr. Raleigh, how do you do? How good of you to come on such a short
     notice. You have seen Norah to-day, I think? Our new curate, Mr. Johnson. We were just longing
     for some music."
Digby was again thankful for her sang froid. He touched her fingers, and bowed to
     the others, and he took his black coffee from the tray presented to him by the butler, and
     apologized in the most ordinary manner for not being in evening dress.
"And may we have some music, please? Mr. Raleigh is a musician, you know, Mr. Johnson;
     perhaps you know his songs, though?"
Mr. Johnson said he was passionately fond of music, and he knew Mr. Raleigh's name quite
     well, and had once sung a song of his called "Love's Sweet Illusions."
"I have not written a song of that name; I never write ballads," said the musician,
     crushingly, as he opened the piano.
"Something stormy, please," said Lady Joan, carelessly; "it is so hot that if you played
     anything sentimental I think it might affect even my unmusical nerves."
"Something of your own," said Norah. They were the first words she had spoken, and the
     musician glanced nervously in her direction.
He sat down and played the song he had just written, and hummed the words to show how it
     went. They were taken from the "Shaving of Shagpat," and the music was full of the reckless
     passion and meaning of the original.

"Whether we die or we live,
Matters it now no more;
Life hath naught further to give;
Love is its crown and its core;
Come to us either, we're rife,—
Death or life!
"Death can take not away,
Darkness and light are the same;
We are beyond the pale ray,
Wrapt in a rosier flame;
Welcome which will to our breath,—
Life or Death!"

When he began to play, all the stormy and conflicting feelings of the last few hours passed
     through his mind, and he was seized with the grimness and humor of the situation in which he
     found himself, and he played better than either of the two women, who were so strangely woven
     into his life, had ever heard him play before. When he reached the second verse he stopped
     humming the words, though none of them noticed it; and when he came to the end no one spoke for
     some seconds.
The musician was thinking that he knew now which one he wanted to marry, and that it did not
     matter if his love affairs went wrong so long as there was music to be made.
Lady Joan went on with her shawl, and reflected that if she lived to be a hundred she should
     never understand musical people or their ways.
Norah lay with her brown eyes full of tears, and she was thinking that love was the strongest
     thing in the world, for it could outlive its ideals.
The curate was not thinking at all, and he got up and put down his cup with a clatter.
"Very sweet and pretty," he said; "it quite reminds me of a little Italian thing I once heard
     on a military band at Leamington. Have you ever taken the waters at Leamington, Mr.
     Raleigh?"
"Play something else," said Lady Joan, abruptly, for the spell was working well, she thought,
     and she smiled triumphantly again at the tears in Norah's eyes.
This time Lady Joan walked to the window and stepped out on the terrace.
"Have you seen the lake in moonlight, Mr. Johnson?" she called out when the music stopped;
     and the curate followed her into the garden.
The musician crossed over to the couch by the other window, and sat down on a chair close to
     it.
"Norah," he said in a low tone, "do you know when I wrote the last thing I played?"
She said nothing, and her fingers trembled.
"I wrote it when you went away, last time, with your father. It was full of tears for
     you."
She still kept her face turned from him, and she spoke almost in a whisper.
"And the other? The song?"
"Guess," he said, also in a whisper.
She swept her tearful eyes round upon him searchingly, hungrily.
"Was it this evening—after—?"
He bowed his head gravely. Her hands went out to him impetuously.
"Oh, Digby, did it make you feel all that?"
"There is no doubt," said Lady Joan, loudly, "that our sympathies or our antipathies make us
     sometimes imagine a likeness where it cannot exist. I remember when I was a small child and
     came to stay with my great-uncle here, I used to invent every kind of excuse for going down to
     the post-office, because I thought the boy behind the counter was like a cousin of mine I had a
     romantic admiration for at the time. And of course you know how there are some days when
     everybody in the street reminds you of some one you don't want to meet, and others when you
     feel you have not the least affinity to your own sister. The fact is, family likeness is all
     rubbish, like most of the traditions we have grown up with; I mean, there is just as much
     chance of two strangers being alike, which you have just proved yourself, Mr. Johnson, by
     supposing Mr. Raleigh and my little friend Norah to be brother and sister. Shall we go in, now,
     or would you like another turn round the garden?"
The curate felt he had been sufficiently battered in that one brief stroll to the lake, and
     he consulted his watch and said he had some work waiting for him at home. So they came back
     again through the open window, and found Norah still lying on the couch, and the musician on
     the low chair at her side.
"What a horrid little man," said Lady Joan, when the curate had left.
"Is he?" said Norah, vaguely.
"Oh, I don't think he's bad," said the musician, cheerfully.
Their hostess made a huge effort, and preserved her smile.
"It may be because I had to entertain him," she said, knitting busily at her large white
     shawl.
"Why didn't you leave him alone?" they asked, with the sublime innocence of the selfish.
"Because that was what you did," she replied.
"Oh, but we thought you were getting on so well with him," said Norah.
"Besides," added Digby, "you need not have asked him into the garden."
"Perhaps I needn't," said Lady Joan, and counted her stitches.
"I am so dreadfully worried about something," she said, presently.
"What about?" they asked, feeling that it had somehow been the atmosphere of the whole
     day.
"The dilapidation of my pig-styes; Jones says two of them will go on for some time, but the
     others want repairing. Now, is it worth while to have two repaired, or shall I wait until they
     all fall to pieces, and put up brick ones?"
"That is a question," said Norah, gravely.
The musician laughed heartily.
"What a fuss ladies make about trifles. If you had a man to manage your affairs—"
"But I haven't," she said quickly, and looked him full in the face; "I thought of getting
     one, but—it has fallen through."
The musician did not laugh any more, and Norah's big eyes began to shine again. Lady Joan
     felt she had fully deserved that little bit of revenge. But it was not amusing enough to carry
     any further, and she was beginning to weary of the protracted love-making of the day,
     especially now that she was no longer a principal actor in the play. So she folded up her work
     elaborately, and pinned it in a white silk handkerchief, and put her hand on her mouth to
     conceal a yawn.
"It has been the longest day I have ever spent. I suppose it is the weather. Would you shut
     the piano, Mr. Raleigh? You look tired to death, Norah, and I am going to take you to bed. Come
     along at once, please."
They all rose to their feet, and there was an embarrassing moment. But Lady Joan took another
     little bit of revenge here, and kept her arm round Norah's waist, and her sharp eyes on both of
     them.
"You will come to breakfast to-morrow, and bring Sonny with you? Say good-night and come,
     Norah, I am so sleepy."
So they all shook hands frigidly, and the musician asked what time breakfast was; and they
     left him alone in the long drawing-room, and went upstairs. Lady Joan still found him there
     when she came down again, half-an-hour later; he was at the piano, but he got up as she came
     in.
"You are the finest woman I ever met," he said with emotion.
She made a gesture of impatience.
"Don't cover me with virtues I don't possess; I can't stand it," she said sharply; she had a
     very unmusical voice, he thought. "Don't you know that my god is expediency? It is the only one
     that is any good for this world. I don't want you to marry Norah, or I should not have come
     back to the inn to ask you to marry me. Do you suppose my pride suffered nothing by that?
     However, you are going to marry her because it is absolutely the only way out of it, and I have
     been obliged to give in to you both. But for Heaven's sake don't imagine I am doing it from
     unselfishness, or any of that bosh, because I'm not."
"Then you have not forgiven me?" he asked humbly.
"I shall never forgive you," said Lady Joan, decidedly; "is it not an insult that you should
     suppose me capable of forgiveness?"
"Perhaps it is," said the musician, thoughtfully. "Why was I born so accursedly unlucky?"
"I'm afraid I can't tell you. But you seem to be going to have all you want now, so it is
     about time you ceased railing at your fate. I suppose if I were properly unselfish I should
     efface myself at once, and part from you in an affecting scene. But the people who make
     affecting scenes are apt to forget that they have got to meet again afterwards as ordinary
     actors in an ordinary play, and then the memory of the affecting scene makes them sheepish; so
     I prefer to tell you that I am merely and vulgarly angry with you for inviting me to make a
     fool of myself. Not that I envy that poor child upstairs either; she doesn't understand you a
     bit, and you will wound her half-a-dozen times a day. It is not my affair, however, and you
     will have to get through it together somehow; I wash my hands of you both."
The musician said he thought they might manage it, perhaps; and Lady Joan pulled down the
     blind in eloquent silence, and rang the bell. He took the hint and held out his hand.
"Good-night. You will come to breakfast?"
"Since you say so; I always do what you tell me," he said, with truth.
"No, you don't," she contradicted, "or you would never have cajoled me into saying I would
     marry you. If you had done what I told you to-day all this trouble would not have arisen. How
     brutally forgetful men are!"
Which was hardly fair of her, he thought, as it was his distinct recollection that she had
     really ended in asking him to marry her, and had hardly waited for his assent to the proposal;
     if she had meant what she said in the castle meadow, and kept to it, there would have been no
     complications at all. And the musician finished his cigar in the orchard of the "Relton Arms,"
     and came to the conclusion that Lady Joan with all her excellent qualities had an unpleasant
     amount of worldly wisdom and egoism in her composition, which he had never discovered until he
     had seen it contrasted with the womanly innocence of his dear little betrothed.
"How brutally forgetful men are!" were the words that remained on the lips of the worldly
     wise woman all through that hot night in August.
