
CHAPTER IV.
The "Relton Arms" had the reputation of being the most respectable inn in the little country
     town of Relton. It had no particular right to this title, being smaller and more shabby than
     the "Red Lion" down the street, which was a modern innovation run by a speculator from the
     neighboring market-town, and promised particular advantages to cyclists which they never quite
     seemed to reap; but it had outlived generations of Reltons up at the old Court, and it bore
     their family escutcheon on its sign-board, and all the club dinners were held in its
     oak-panelled parlor; and the frequent presence of the rector on occasions when alcohol was
     banished from the table had naturally helped it to keep up its reputation. The fallacy was
     maintained equally strangely by the silence of its landlord, who only grew more taciturn as he
     grew more intoxicated, while the people who were fond of talking, notably his wife, made
     capital out of his silence and applauded him for it, so that he too became respectable in the
     eyes of Relton. And never having been known to contradict any one in his life, respectable he
     accordingly consented to remain.
It was on a sultry, still afternoon towards the end of the summer that Roger Brill, the
     comely rat-catcher of the town, raised the latch of the "Relton Arms" about tea-time.
"Mornin', missus," said he.
"And I'm sure it's mornin' to you, Muster Brill, notwithstandin' it's being arternoon by time
     o'sun, which be a foolish difference to make among old acquaintance; but there, there's a deal
     too much talkin' about trifles in my thinkin'. And be you ready for a cup of tea, lad, or be it
     the usual you'll be wantin'?"
Without waiting for the reply, which had been the same, like the question, for the last
     fifteen years, the bustling landlady hastened forward with a chair and sent her obedient
     husband for the beer. One of the most remarkable phases of a monotonous incident is the way in
     which some people contrive to give it the appearance of novelty. Mrs. Haxtell belonged to such
     a class, and it did not in the least disturb her method that her husband had usually filled the
     pewter pot before she had finished inviting her customer to have it. But old Peter was a man of
     deeds, not words, and he chose for his part to make the transaction a purely business one,
     though he allowed his wife to hide it with a veneer of hospitality if she would. And this she
     generally did in the most feminine and transparent manner possible, until the time for payment
     came, when she would meekly retire under cover of her sex, and leave her husband to battle with
     the creditor.
"Good sport to-day, lad?" asked Peter presently.
"Aye, for sure," answered Roger; and then, glancing professionally at the row of dead rats
     that hung from his waist, he added slowly, "more ways nor one."
"Eh," said Peter, with a slight access of emphasis.
They all knew something more was coming, and Mrs. Haxtell's knowledge of the rat-catcher's
     temperament sufficed to keep her breathlessly silent in view of coaxing him to tell his news;
     though, with the jealousy of the reformed thief who hates to see his brother continuing to
     thieve, she glanced imploringly at her husband and daughter, who had no intention of speaking,
     as if to silence them likewise.
"Lady Relton's Dick came down my way last night," began Roger, deliberately filling his
     pipe.
So far his news came within the ken of his audience, and they were quick to maintain a share
     in it.
"I saw him myself, I did," began Lily Eliza; but her mother promptly took up the tale.
"Lady Relton's Dick? Eh, but he come along nigh after sunset, he did, and he says to my man,
     he says, 'Seen Muster Brill?' he says. And my man told him, he did, as ye worn't long gone
     home, not to call it short neither, nor yet very long; leastways ye were gone along home, he
     said, didn't ye, Pete? Speak up, man, and say what ye know, and doan't sit starin' as though
     heavin and earth worn't big enough for your eyes to look into."
"Woman," said Peter, with unusual effort, "heaven and earth bain't big enough for your tongue
     to clapper in, nor yet they wouldn't be if t' other place was joined on too."
Here Roger struck in afresh.
"Lady Relton's Dick said the rats in the stable worn't worth their keep. Lady Relton told him
     she'd pay the corn for the horses, but the rats would have to go elsewhere if they wanted good
     grain, as she didn't intend for 'em to have hers. I said I'd go to-morrow, being promised to
     Farmer Wadsden's ricks to-day; but Dick, he says the world has to stop a turnin' round for my
     lady, he says, and she were in a taking along of them rats, so to-day I took the pup along and
     I went up to the Court."
"Ah," gasped the landlady; she had not meant to interrupt, but the approach of the pith of
     the story was too much for her, and with the desperate economy of the schoolboy, who leaves the
     biggest plum to the last, she again diverted the channel of conversation.
"Lady Relton's Dick fetched a gentleman from the station this mornin', and he took him back
     again an hour past. I knows he did, seeing as I was washing the precious baby's face, or was I
     hanging out Mrs. Walker's wash? when the dog-cart come by. Was it the gentleman as ye saw up at
     the Court, Muster Brill?"
Few sights are more melancholy than that of a man who has been robbed of his story by
     another; and good-natured Roger Brill pushed back his chair at this second interruption, and
     rose to his feet with something like offended dignity.
"If ye want to have the talkin' to yourself, missus, I be going to clear out. Cause why? It
     bain't reasonable to tell a body somethin' fresh when the body have heard it afore, and I ain't
     the man to spoil t' other body's tale, so good arternoon to ye."
But here Peter became peacemaker.
"Sit ye down, lad, and doan't heed her clapperin' tongue. I doan't, and it's
     clipper-clappered at me this twenty year."
With an effort of generosity the injured Roger recognized a grievance greater than his own,
     and by drinking the remainder of his beer standing he considered he had compromised his dignity
     sufficiently to resume his seat and his story.
"Lord, what rats they was!" he exclaimed, his eye kindling at the recollection. "I never
     could have thought so well of my lady as that she'd leave 'em to get to that pitch before
     calling me in. Why, Peter, man, if she'd called me in only a month ago she'd have spoilt the
     sport summat! but here they was, eaten to bustin' with corn, and no thought of the morrow, as
     the Holy Scripture says. Eh, but that was a mornin', that was; well, I reckon I'd laid out some
     dozen or more in the stable yard, when up comes Lady Relton and Mr. Jack." He paused to watch
     the effect of his superior knowledge on his hearers, chose to ignore the landlady's triumphant
     whisper, "That's him," and sighed deeply. "I doan't know no more than the dead what business it
     was of his to come hangin' round my lady, what's all unprotected and alone like, bless
     her!"
"Nay, indeed," echoed his hearers feelingly.
"More partickler," continued Roger, warmly, and striking his fist on the wooden table till
     the tea-cups rattled, "more partickler as Mr. Jack be Mr. Raleigh's own brother, and my lady
     belongs to Mr. Raleigh if ever she belonged to anybody; and no one can't deny as it's been my
     intention to put 'em together this four year come harvest time. No one can't deny it, no
     one."
"True, lad, true," grunted Peter sympathetically, while his wife cunningly seized the
     opportunity to interrupt again by appearing to enter warmly into the rat-catcher's disturbed
     feelings.
"And to think of his precious baby," sniffed Mrs. Haxtell, pouring herself out another cup of
     tea; "to think of the dear lamb, with no mother and not much father to speak of, passing of his
     innocent childhood without the woman's care his father ought to give him. I've no patience with
     such neglect, though I'm sure I hope I've done my best by the child, as I thought to myself
     only this mornin' when I saw him stuffin' his precious fat cheeks with green plums. It ain't
     every one would let a child do that!"
Lily Eliza became restive at this point.
"Tell about Mr. Jack, Muster Brill," she urged timidly.
"Daughter," said old Peter, sternly, "it ain't the part of a well-meanin', God-fearin' lass
     to ask such a question, and if you worn't your mother's own daughter you wouldn't have such
     sinful desires to ask 'em."
In her anxiety to hear the rest of the story, the landlady allowed this backhanded attack on
     her morals to pass unnoticed, and Roger began afresh. "Well, up they comes together, talkin'
     and laughin' quite friendly like, and my lady says to him, she says, 'Here's the rats you said
     I was to have killed,' she says, 'and isn't it a dear little dog?' she says. So I says to her,
     'Aye, it be a good pup; it's killed fourteen since breakfast,' and I seemed to offend her like,
     for up she gets from where she'd been patting him, and she looks at Mr. Jack all in a blaze,
     and she says all angry like, 'That's what you call sport, is it?' she says. 'Mr. Digby wouldn't
     call it sport,' she says."
"No more he wouldn't," said both the women simultaneously.
"That's true enough," said Roger, slowly, "but Lady Relton, she bain't the smirking soft kind
     o' woman what likes to spare the rat and spoil the corn, and I can't rightly make out what's
     come over her to-day. She didn't seem herself to-day, not anyhow, and she seemed to take a
     pleasure in quarrelin' over everything Mr. Jack said, and then she laughed of him, she did. It
     worn't like my lady, it worn't, to talk soft stuff about killin' rats; that be more like t'
     other one what come after Mr. Raleigh last springtime, the one what had saucer eyes, and
     pretended to be fond of the child, with her nasty clingin', pretendin' ways."
The last words were said with biting contempt, and the women sat silent and sipped their tea
     approvingly. But old Peter had different views concerning the "other one" alluded to, and he
     again made the effort to interrupt.
"Eh, lad, but you be proper hard upon poor Miss Norah, proper hard you be, for sure. I
     wouldn't be saying as ye haven't your reasons for it, but she seemed a quiet sort of maiden
     enough, what didn't mean no harm to speak of, and what's suffered enough for her foolishness,
     I'll be bound."
"I hope she has, I hope she has," exclaimed Roger, vehemently. "Those as comes with their
     sneaking ways tryin' for to corrupt honest folk deserves to suffer for it. No one doan't know
     why she didn't come back when Mr. Raleigh sent that letter after her, and no one doan't know
     why she didn't even answer it; but you take my word for it, it was Providence as interposed and
     wouldn't have nothink to do with her, and it's Providence as opens the way now to Mr. Raleigh
     if he'd only see it, and not want Providence to come down from heaven and poke him into it, so
     to speak. Who be that coming across the street?"
"Why, that be Mr. Raleigh his own self, that be," exclaimed Lily Eliza, joyously, and then
     blushed for fear of another rebuke from her father. This time, however, she did not get it, for
     old Peter for business reasons was always anxious to propitiate the musician in the flying
     visits he paid them, and was far more concerned now in getting to the door in time to open it
     than in his daughter's back-slidings. Besides, he really liked the open-handed young fellow who
     paid up so regularly every quarter for the keep of his son without examining the items of the
     bill, who always came in with a smile and an outstretched hand, and was so inordinately
     grateful for the little they had done for the child.
"Well, Mrs. Haxtell, and how's the boy?" he cried with his cheery voice as he stood on the
     doorstep. "I've brought you a new kind of baccy to try, sir; hope the youngster has been
     behaving himself, eh? Ah, Roger, how does the world go with you? And where's my Sonny?"
"There, now, to think of his father coming so unfortunate like, and he that's never out at
     tea-time more than twice in a twelve-month," fussed the landlady, dusting three chairs in
     succession, and wondering how her back hair was bearing the exertion; "that do seem hard, that
     do; but there, Lady Relton she come down and asked so coaxing like for him to go that I
     couldn't find it in my heart to refuse her; but that be the first time I've let him out o' my
     sight this many weeks. And I'm sure I've been so doleful like all the time he's been gone that
     I won't never let him go again, that I won't; I kept on thinkin' somethin' was going to happen
     to the precious, and I wouldn't never see him again, and what would his father say then, when
     I'd promised to look after him like my own—there, Mr. Raleigh, I feel as if somethin' terrible
     might come to Master Sonny afore we set eyes on him again, that I do!"
"I hope not, Mrs. Haxtell, I hope not," said Digby, encouragingly, wondering if he were a
     hard-hearted parent because he had none of the landlady's nervous sensations concerning his
     son. "It would take a good deal to hurt Master Sonny, I fancy, and he will be in here directly
     turning everything upside down again to your heart's content. Are you off, Mr. Roger? Then I'll
     walk home with you, and have a pipe to get rid of the London smoke. Ah! London is not fit for a
     dog this weather! And will you send the boy down to the castle meadow when he comes in, Mrs.
     Haxtell? Thanks; let him come alone, and learn to be a man."
Only a few minutes later Lady Joan brought her piebald ponies to a standstill before the sign
     of the "Relton Arms," and threw the reins to her groom.
"Here we are, Mrs. Haxtell; did you think I was going to keep him altogether? I nearly did,
     he was so fascinating, and we had such a delightful flirtation together. He is the most
     charming little gentleman to flirt with, because he is never stupid enough to take it in for a
     moment. Look at him now," as the boy flew into the landlady's arms with a shout. "Oh, you
     ungrateful little beggar, after all the cake and the jam I have been giving you! Here, give me
     a kiss, Sonny, and I'll be off. What is it, Mrs. Haxtell? His father, did you say? Oh—yes—to be
     sure, his father—yes!"
Fortunately for her, the landlady was too much engaged with the stormy caresses of the child
     to notice her, as she walked to the window and looked at two hens quarrelling over a grain of
     corn in the yard.
"Aye, my lady, and the child was to go down to the castle meadow all along of himself to find
     his father, to learn to be a man, was what he said. I bain't one to make a fuss over trifles,
     but I don't like to let the child go quite, and yet—"
"What nonsense! of course not; how like a man," said Lady Joan, contemptuously, "besides, the
     child is much too tired to walk all that way. Now for my two kisses, Sonny; I will make it
     three if you don't give me them at once, sir! I will go and make it right with his father, Mrs.
     Haxtell, if you will tell Dick to take the ponies quietly home, please. And may I go across the
     orchard?"
"Eh, but she doan't care what the towns-folk say, do she?" reflected Mrs. Haxtell,
     admiringly, as she watched the tall figure disappearing among the trees.
"I wonder what made me come," thought Lady Joan to herself, as she climbed the stile into the
     castle meadow; and her courage half failed her when she caught sight of a man in a brown felt
     hat that she had seen before, sitting on a fragment of the old ruined wall by the side of the
     brook.
But he had already seen her, and was coming towards her; and with a recklessness which she
     evidenced at once by letting her skirt trail on the damp grass, she went on to meet him.
