
CHAPTER IX.
Lady Joan went up to her town house at the end of the summer, but her philanthropic campaign
     was not a success. The field of philanthropy was overcrowded just then with people like
     herself, who had too little wealth and too much energy to be of any practical use to the great
     organizers of charity, who never wanted anything from their devotees but subscriptions and
     obedience; a reformer does not want to be interfered with by a penniless nobody who has
     independent views concerning his method of reform. And Lady Joan soon found that she was not in
     a set that troubled itself much about the suffering poor. The people she met in Digby's studio
     were mostly theoretical Socialists, who complained that the cause of Socialism was being ruined
     by the enthusiasts who tried to make it work before its principles had been properly
     disseminated among the people; and amongst her other friends were some who had a small and
     private charity of their own, but were so jealous of it when they had that she found it
     impossible to work with them; or else they were quite willing to use her house and her carriage
     and her time, if she would meekly give them all these without being allowed a voice in the
     arrangements or a particle of credit for what she did. And she found that as much sweating went
     on in the administration of charity as its administrators were in the habit of exposing in the
     slums; she met jaded gentlewomen in the employ of philanthropists, who spent their lives in
     addressing envelopes at something less than the market price, and footsore secretaries who
     walked the slums to verify the abuses which their chiefs were to denounce in the newspapers.
     She had never had a high opinion of philanthropy, but it was considerably lowered by her new
     experiences of it. She humbly offered to sing a ballad at a people's concert in the East End;
     but her offer was politely refused on the ground that several of the leading singers of the day
     had offered their services free for the same concert; and she was asked if she would dance the
     skirt dance instead, at a titled lady's 'At Home' for another charitable object. Sundry
     hard-working clergy came to hear of her estimable intentions, and wrote to ask her for
     subscriptions and to offer her district-visiting in their parishes; but as it was the æsthetic
     side of philanthropy alone that had attracted her, she declined their offers promptly and with
     a shudder.
Once, in an impetuous mood, she joined a Ladies' League for the supply of soup and bread to a
     select company of the deserving poor in a West End parish. There were more ladies altogether
     than there were afterwards recipients of their charity; and they all met weekly in one
     another's houses to organize their system of relief during the cold weather. The cold weather
     came along before the preliminaries were arranged. There were no gentlemen at these meetings
     until after the business had been transacted, when afternoon tea was brought in, and a
      recherché reception followed. But the frost continued, and there seemed no prospect
     of the sufferers ever receiving their bread and their soup. Just before Christmas, it came to
     Lady Joan's turn to hold the meeting in her house. It took place in a dingy old library that
     day, and there was no reception afterwards, and no afternoon tea. Lady Joan herself moved three
     resolutions at the opening of the sitting: the first was that there should be no more meetings;
     the second, that all future business should be transacted by a committee of gentlemen only; and
     the third, that the charity, if given at all, should be administered to all sufferers,
     irrespective of character. All three motions were thrown out indignantly, and their proposer
     sent in her resignation the next day.
"Philanthropy is the selfish pastime of the great, and I was an owl to meddle with it," she
     said gloomily to Sir Marcus, who happened to be lunching with her one day about that time. Sir
     Marcus always came to see her whenever he came to town, and told her of his last letter to the
     papers, or his last effort to improve the condition of the working-man;—she had loved his boy,
     and she always listened without laughing at him; these were the two ideas he vaguely connected
     with her in his mind. Another man, a less easily impressed one, might have been killed by the
     suddenness of Jack's death; but Sir Marcus, although his infatuation for his scapegrace son had
     been the deepest attachment he had ever felt for any one, had been really more affected by the
     tragedy of his end than by his actual death; and so it came about that he was considerably aged
     by the shock, and yet was able to return again to his books and his hobbies.
"Philanthropy in town is all a mistake, my dear," he answered her, hotly; "it's nothing but a
     trumped-up job among the swells, that's what it is, of course. In my time, you know, before
     there were such a lot of them in the nursery, and when I was pitching my thousands right and
      left,—that was philanthropy if you like! But now philanthropists are merely
     commercial contractors,—you mark my words, my dear, commercial contractors running the whole
     concern for profit; and what good can come out of that, eh? Ah, you must come down into the
     country for morals; Londoners are the biggest thieves in existence."
"Not so bad as that, Sir Marcus," she remonstrated; "I don't think philanthropists are
     commercial contractors exactly, at least not the ones I've met. They are mostly egoists and
     mostly unbusinesslike, but not thieves, no."
"Isn't that what I said?" said Sir Marcus, testily. It was not; but she did not wish to risk
     her reputation with him, and she listened patiently while he poured out his own schemes for the
     education of the country laborer, or rather of the Murville laborer, until she repeated her
     first remark to herself with a yawn, and wrote round to Digby, after Sir Marcus had left, to
     come and tell her what to do next.
She had seen a good deal of Digby lately; he knew all about her ambitious schemes and her
     failure to carry them out, and he was eager to sympathize with her whenever she would allow
     him; while she accepted his sympathy as one who did not want it particularly, but liked to
     command it at will. And during the growth of his baby's teeth, which rendered both conversation
     and work difficult in the flat in Victoria Street, the musician often found his way to Lady
     Joan's house in Pont Street in the hours that he would otherwise have spent in writing music.
     It is true that he honestly tried for some time to write classical lullabies to his daughter in
     the pantry, that being the corner in the flat furthest removed from the nursery, while his wife
     sang her to sleep in the cradle to the homely ditty of "Hush-a-by-baby," and that he always
     nursed her when he was asked, and did not swear when he made her cry and was blamed for his
     clumsiness but after a time he made no objection when his wife sent him round to take her
     excuses and to dine alone with Lady Joan, until it became no uncommon thing for him to spend
     his evenings with her, while Norah stayed at home and nursed the baby. They were all three
     totally regardless of public opinion in the matter, though it might well have come to their
     ears that Norah was being very generally pitied by the musician's lady friends, not for her
     loneliness, but for her neglect of the treasure she seemed so unconscious of possessing, and
     that the musician was allowed to go scathless as he always was, and that Lady Joan was hated
     without exception. But the musician, who had done what he liked since his infancy, meant to go
     on doing it now in defiance of all the scandals that were about; and Lady Joan, for her part,
     always went out of her way to add to them if she could; while Norah only ignored them
     altogether, and smiled to herself, and so deceived every one who knew her, including her
     husband.
"Yes?" she said to Mrs. Reginald Routh, when that lady remarked one day, during a short call,
     that Mr. Digby always seemed to be in Pont Street, "it is very unfortunate he should miss you
     so often; but Joan has wanted him a good deal lately, and I have been only too glad, when baby
     has been fretful, to send him round to see her. There is such a platonic friendship between
     them, you know."
"Platonic, do you call it, Mrs. Digby?" said her visitor, with her accustomed smile. "Do you
     know, my dear Mrs. Digby, that from what I know of Plato,—and I attended all Mr.
     Digby's lectures on Plato and Schopenhauer, and their relation to music and Socialism, which
     was before you knew him, of course,—I don't fancy he would have countenanced such
     goings on in his ideal Republic? Of course you know best, and I should not dream of interfering
     between a wife and a husband; but I should certainly say myself, if I were asked, that that
     young woman's behavior in Pont Street is more fit for the Old Testament than for Plato. Perhaps
     you have not read any Plato, though?"
"No; only the Old Testament; and that I was obliged to do for myself, you see, because there
     were no lectures upon it," rejoined Norah, gravely; and she bore the swift scrutiny of Mrs.
     Reginald Routh without flinching. Mrs. Reginald changed the subject; it was the only thing left
     her to do, and she did it well.
"Of course I should not speak so strongly, dear Mrs. Digby, if I had not known your husband
     so well and so intimately before he met you at all. And perhaps if I had had your good
     fortune," here she glanced in a telling manner at the baby on Norah's knee, "and could have had
     a small soul to develop, I, too, should have become a womanly woman, with no desire for
     intellectual improvement. Ah, Mrs. Digby, you have in your child what we childless wives have
     failed to find in our search after wisdom. I frankly own that you are to be envied."
And she had her revenge, for Norah believed her.
Digby came in when she had gone.
"Joan has sent round for me to help her out of a difficulty. Any message, childie? I shall be
     back to dinner. And have you seen my warm gloves?"
"I mended them and put them in your drawer, dear. That's just like a man to be surprised at
     finding them in the right place! Oh, I wish you would write about the bath-room pipe—"
"Damn," said Digby, audibly.
"Don't, Digby. It really is important, because the wall is getting damp, and—"
"That doesn't matter, does it? I've moved the piano."
"But it is coming through into the nursery, Digby."
"Oh, all right. I'll do it when I come in."
"Mrs. Reginald has been here."
"I know; that's why I haven't. What did she say?"
"She seemed to think that you and Joan were enacting an Old Testament episode without the
     sanction of inspiration."
"What awful cheek!"
"Oh, she only meant to be friendly, I think. She seemed to admire baby."
"Deuced clever woman, Mrs. Reginald. I'll write about the pipe when I come in."
He was with Lady Joan for about two hours, and it was quite dark when he left her house. They
     had reached that stage in their intercourse when conversation is rather difficult, but
     companionship is a matter of course. They did not discuss the arts now, nor the ethics of
     Socialism, nor the position of woman. None of these things seemed to matter half so much to
     them as his prospects of getting fresh pupils, or her choice of a dining-room paper. And
     sometimes they did not speak at all, though their silence was never an embarrassed one. This
     afternoon there had been more than usual to talk about, for she had resolved to give up her
     visions of philanthropy and was thinking of going abroad, and he had been trying to dissuade
     her, purely in his character of adviser, without letting her see that he hoped she would remain
     in London. He was beginning to realize how much he liked coming to see her, and how great a
     relief it was to escape from the people who had claims upon him, and for whose bath-room pipes
     he was legally responsible, to some one who had no claim upon him, and whose bath-room pipes
     were in consequence so much pleasanter to superintend. And he walked down the doorsteps slowly,
     with a feeling that he had not persuaded her to remain, and that he was a fool not to have used
     the only methods of persuasion that he would like to have used, and that might have gained his
     point. There was a weary vista before him of endless letters to the plumber, of endless
     commonplace conversations with his wife, of endless unfulfilled ambitions, everything that
     chokes the energy of the artistic enthusiast who has been married long enough to lose his first
     illusions, and not long enough to learn to do without them. He was in the mood to be
     exasperated by a triviality, and he swore beneath his breath when a man with a beard stumbled
     against him in the portico.
"Digby!" shouted the man with the beard, in a voice that made the passers-by stop and
     look.
The musician recoiled, and stammered something. He said afterwards that the fateful truth
     flashed upon him in a second of time, but in reality he stood there for some moments while the
     existence of the man before him slowly worked its way to his brain. And with the realization of
     Jack's existence came the realization of something he had been trying for six months to hide
     from himself. Jack's return from the dead meant—good heavens! what did it not mean to him
     now?
And to Joan also?
"You—you must not go into her suddenly like this; it might kill her, the shock, don't you
     know," he found himself saying, in a kind of dream, when the first hurried and incoherent words
     of greeting had passed between them. Joan was all he was thinking of just then, Joan and the
     last six months of uninterrupted friendship. Yet Digby was not a bad man, nor a malicious one
     exactly; but his old affection for his brother, which had always depended more on habit than on
     natural affinity, had been rudely broken by his supposed death, and it was not easy to revive
     it again now, nor was it made easier by a concurrence of circumstances which seemed to demand
     that he should rather have stayed away altogether. Why had Jack chosen this moment to come
     back? A few years back the musician would have found an occasion for moralizing in the strange
     conflict of feelings within him.
"I—I feel quite queer myself," he said, making an effort to grasp his brother's hand more
     warmly; "why on earth didn't you let us know that the wrong man—that the other man was killed?
     You always did imagine that we knew all about you without your troubling to write to us, Jack.
     Never was so surprised in my life,—delighted, I should say. But what does it all mean?"
"Eh, what? Why, don't you see, I thought it was all bally rot to write and explain that they
     had cabled my name instead of Jack Rackstraw's, because I meant to come over that next mail.
     And then, when I got another berth offered me with an elegant screw, I reckoned I 'd take it
     and go on being dead for a space, rather a scheme, don't you twig? And besides, I thought if I
     lay low till next fall Joan might find out she cared for me a bit more than she calculated, eh?
     Hasn't it been hard work, though, just sitting tight and not hearing from her! Now, fire
     yourself, Digby, and let me freeze on to that bell."
"But look here, old man," urged the musician, desperately, "let me go in first and explain.
     You go round to Norah and wait till I come for you. These—these shocks are too much for women;
     they can't always stand them; women can't, you know. Surely you must see the folly of
     frightening her—"
"You old woman, Digby; what by all that's holy are you playing at? Joan's not that sort;
     besides, if you'd been away three years, old chap, I guess you'd run the risk of seeing a girl
     turn pale for you. Eh? So clear out."
He twisted the musician round with one touch of his hand, and flew up the steps. But quick as
     he was, Digby was quicker still, and sprang before him at the top of the steps, panting, and
     hardly knowing what he did. Jack seized him by the arm in slowly dawning amazement.
"'Pon my word, if Joan's half as frightened as you look now, I shall begin to believe it
      is a shock to meet some one who's supposed to have kicked. You want a drink, old man,
     and if you don't go and get it now I—"
"I know, I 'm going, I am really, Jack. It's purely for your own good I am speaking; why
     should it matter to me? But you're such an unsuspecting chap, and I don't want to see you made
     a fool of; and look here, Jack, I'm a brute to suggest it, I know, but women are fickle, as all
     the world knows, and she thought you were dead, and after all no one could blame her if—don't
     you see?"
There was a sudden pause then, and a loosening of the strong grip on his arm, and the
     musician began to feel something of the brute he had been so ready to avow himself.
"Of course, I'm not insinuating that there's some one else, I don't know his name if there
     is; but knowing their nature as I do, I think it's wiser not to—not to give them a clean bill
     of constancy always—eh? At all events, how would it be for me to meet you at the flat when I've
     sounded the ground a bit with Joan? It would only make a delay of half-an-hour or so, and—my
     dear fellow!"
Jack had caught him by the coat in a sudden paroxysm of nervous fury, and Digby found himself
     half throttled and pinned against the stone wall of the portico, while a loud peal from the
     door-bell resounded through the house.
"You brute—you! Why do you want to keep me from her? If you were any one else standing
     between her and me I would wipe the floor with you. There—clear out, can't you? Oh, hang it,
     I've been half crazed to meet her all day, and now—that devilish suggestion of yours—ah! can't
     you go, you?"
Digby shrank back as he felt himself free. There were steps coming along the hall inside, and
     he curbed himself to speak carelessly as he turned away as if to leave.
"Poor chap, I forgive you when I think of the hash you are going to make of it. You weren't
     born to deal with wily women, and when to-morrow comes, ah!—"
After all, when the man opened the door, it was Digby who entered the house. A man with a
     short beard was walking rapidly down the street.
"What is it? Anything wrong?" asked Lady Joan, quickly.
"No, no, nothing. Only I feel as though I had been persuading you against your will and for
     my own selfish reasons, and I came back to say so. There is nothing to keep you in
     England—nothing. Why not go abroad—to-morrow?"
"Oh. Is that all? How stupid of you to come back and look tragic just for that. And as if I
     should not go without waiting for your permission, Monsieur! Why, I have just been making out a
     route. Come and look."
He followed her finger mechanically with his eyes as she traced it over the map, and he made
     a great effort to compose himself. She exhausted France and Germany before she noticed his
     silence, and then she pushed away the Baedeker suddenly, and leaned back to try and see his
     face. He was standing a little behind her.
"I wish you'd say something, Digby. You look as if you'd seen a ghost."
"I have," he answered quietly, without taking his eyes from the top of her head.
"Whose was it?" she asked, half puzzled, half amused.
"My brother Jack's. He is in London."
He did not see that the color fled from her face, nor that she gasped a little as though she
     had a difficulty in breathing. What he saw was that she slowly turned round on her chair and
     looked to him beseechingly.
"Is—it—true?" she asked in a hushed tone. The dull anguish of it lent a fierceness to his
     purpose.
"I have spoken to him. Would to God it were not!"
It did not seem strange to her that he should say so, nor that he did not come and stroke her
     hair as he so often did when she fancied herself in trouble. She crossed her arms on the top of
     the chair, and laid her cheek on them.
"I've always known that he must come back. Jack could never be dead," she murmured in a
     hopeless tone of voice; "he is overflowing with life, crude, arrogant life. Why did I believe
     them when they said he was dead?"
"Perhaps you wished to believe it," said the musician.
When he found the silence that followed no longer endurable, he moved a little nearer to her,
     where he could see the fierce movement of her shoulders and the curls on the back of her
     neck.
"Shall we resume our conversation?" he said, and touched the Baedeker.
"How can we? I must wait a little, see Jack, no, no, not see him, but—but write to him—if it
     is possible he never had my other letter? Why has he come back to torment me just when I was
     beginning to feel happy? And—oh, drop that book, can't you? Don't you understand that I cannot
     go abroad now?"
"Why not?"
"Because, oh, how dense you are! Even if I can get away from Jack, and I feel as if I never
     should be free again, but even supposing I can break his heart and leave him, how can I go away
     and be by myself interminably? You don't know me if you think that would do me any good."
"I don't think so. I did not suggest your going alone. You don't know me if—you
     think I could let you go."
She raised herself slowly on to her elbows and covered her eyes with her hands. He was
     looking down at the scarlet cover of the Baedeker.
"What do you mean?"
"What I have said. You don't want to see Jack. I will take you away from him. Will you
     come?"
She did not speak, and a shiver passed swiftly down her frame.
He came nearer to her.
"I believe you like him still," he said, with a curious smile.
She raised her head, and clenched her fists, and laughed harshly. She, too, looked at the
     scarlet cover of the Baedeker.
"I should hate him—if he were worth it. But I have never loved him."
"Then answer my question. Will you come?"
She moistened her lips and tried to speak clearly.
"We were so happy as it was. Can't it go on?"
"No, it cannot go on. If you were a man you would not ask that. Will you come?"
She closed her eyes, and tried not to hear the singing in her ears, and thought he would come
     and touch her. But he did not move at all.
"You are frightened, are you not?" he said.
"Of you? No, I don't think I am frightened of you."
He came so near then that she felt his warm breath on her neck.
"Not of me, oh, no. But, all the same, you are frightened, or else you would not
     hesitate."
He turned away again, and she dropped her hands quickly from her eyes.
"You are not going?"
"Not if you wish me to stay," he said, and folded his arms and waited.
"I do want you to stay—give me time to think, Digby—I—"
A cab rattled past the house outside, and as the sound died away, she rose slowly and with
     difficulty from her chair and looked at him. And he came and supported her on his arm, and drew
     his fingers up her throat and round her face to her forehead, and back again to her chin, and
     so forced her to meet his eyes.
"I will come," she said.
