
CHAPTER I.
AT the little quay in the town many boats were lading and unlading, and many
      setting their sails to go southward with their loads of eggs or of birds, of flowers, of fruit
      or of herbage; all smelling of summer rain and the odours of freshly ploughed earths turned up
      with the nest of the lark and the root of the cowslip laid bare in them.
She lost herself in its little busy crowd, and learned what she needed without any asking,
      in turn, question of her.
Arslàn had sailed at sunrise.
There was a little boat, with an old man in it, loaded with Russian violets from a
      flower‐farm.
The old man was angered and in trouble: the lad who steered for him had failed him, and the
      young men and boys on the canals were all too busy to be willing too the voyage for the
      wretched pittance he offered. She heard, and leaned towards him.
“Do you go the way to Paris?”
The old man nodded.
“I will steer for you, then,” she said to him; and leaped down amongst his fragrant freight.
      He was a stranger to her, and let her be. She did for him as well as another, since she said
      that she knew those waters well.
He was in haste, and, without more words, he loosened his sail, and cut his moor‐rope, and
      set his little vessel adrift down the water‐ways of the town, the violets filling the air with
      their odours and blue as the eyes of a child that wakes smiling.
All the old familiar streets, all the dusky gateways and dim passages, all the ropes on
      which the lanterns and the
       linen hung, all the wide carved stairways water‐washed, all
      the dim windows that the women filled with pots of ivy and the song of birds,—she was drifting
      from them with every pulse of the tide, never again to return; but she looked at them without
      seeing them, indifferent, and having no memory of them; her brain, and her heart, and her soul
      were with the boat that she followed.
It was the day of the weekly market.
The broad flat‐bottomed boats were coming in at sunrise, in each some cargo of green food or
      of farm produce: a strong girl rowing with bare arms, and the sun catching the white glint of
      her head‐gear. Boys with coils of spotted birds’ eggs, children with lapsful of wood‐gathered
      primroses, old women nursing a wicker cage of cackling hens or hissing geese, mules and asses,
      shaking their bells and worsted tassels, bearing their riders high on sheepskin saddles,—these
      all went by her on the river, or on the towing‐path, or on the broad high road that ran for a
      space by the water’s edge.
All of these knew her well; all of these sometime of another had jeered her, jostled her,
      flouted her, or fled from her. But no one stopped her. No one cared enough for her to care
      even to wonder where she went.
She glided out of the town, and along the banks she knew so well, and passed the wood and
      the orchards of Yprès. But what at another time would have had pain for her, and held her with
      the bonds of a sad familiarity, now scarcely moved her. One great grief and one great passion
      had drowned all these lesser woes, and scorched to ashes all slighter memories.
All day long they sailed.
At noon the old man gave her a little fruit and a crust as part of her wage; she tried to
      eat them, knowing she would want all her strength.
They left the course of the stream that she knew, and sailed further than she had ever
      sailed; passed towns whose bells were ringing, and noble bridges gleaming in the sun, and
      water‐mills black and gruesome, and bright orchards and vineyards heavy with the promise of
      fruit. She knew none of them. There were only the water flowing under the keel, and the blue
      sky above, with the rooks circling in it, which had the look of friends to her.

The twilight fell; still the wind served, and still they held on; the mists came, white and
      thick, and stars rose, and the voices from the shores sounded strangely, with here and there a
      note of music or the deep roll of a drum.
So she drifted out of the old life into an unknown world. But she never once looked back.
      Why should she?—He had gone before.
When it was quite night, they drew near to a busy town, whose lights glittered by hundreds
      and thousands on the bank. There were many barges and small boats at anchor in its wharves,
      hanging out lanterns at their mast‐heads.
The old man bade her steer his boat amongst them, and with a cord he made it fast.
“This is Paris?” she asked, breathlessly.
The old man laughed.
“Paris is days’ sail away.”
“I asked you if you went to Paris?”
The old man laughed again.
“I said I came the Paris way. So I have done. Land.”
Her face set with an anger that made him wince, dull though his conscience was.
“You cheated me,” she said, briefly; and she climbed the boat’s side, and shaking the
      violets off her, set her foot upon the pier, not stooping to waster more words.
But a great terror fell on her.
She had thought that the boat would bring her straight to Paris; and, once in Paris, she had
      thought that it would be as easy to trace his steps as it had been in the little town that she
      had left. She had had no sense of distance—no knowledge of the size of cities; the width, and
      noise, and hurry, and confusion of this one waterside town made her helpless and stupid.
She stood like a young lost dog upon the flags of the landing‐place, not knowing whither to
      go, nor what to do.
The old man, busied in unlading his violets into the wicker kreels of the women waiting for
      them, took no notice of her. He had used her so long as he had wanted her.
There were incessant turmoil, outcry, and uproar round the landing‐stairs, where large
      cargoes of beetroot, cabbages, and fish were being put on shore. The buyers and the sellers
      screamed and swore; the tawny light of oil‐lamps
       flickered over their furious faces; the people jostled her,
      pushed her, cursed her, for being in the way. She shrank back in bewilderment and disgust, and
      walked feebly away from the edge of the river, trying to think, trying to get back her old
      health and her old force.
The people of the streets were too occupied to take any heed of her. Only one ragged little
      boy danced before her a moment, shrieking, “The gipsy! the gipsy! Good little fathers, look to
      your pockets!”
But she was too used to the language of abuse to be moved by it. She went on, as though she
      were deaf, through the yelling of the children and the chattering and chaffering of the
      trading multitude.
There was a little street leading off the quay, picturesque and ancient, with parquetted
      houses and quaint painted signs; at the corner of it sat an old woman on a wooden stool, with
      a huge fan of linen on her head like a mushroom. She was selling roasted chestnuts by the
      glare of a little horn lantern.
By this woman she paused, and asked the way to Paris.
“Paris! This is a long way from Paris.”
“How far—to walk?”
“That depends. My boy went up there on foot last summer; he is a young fool, blotting and
      messing with ink and paper, while he talks of being a great man, and sups with the rats in the
      sewers! He, I think, was a week walking it. It is pleasant enough in fair weather. But you—you
      are a gipsy. Where are your people?”
“I have no people.”
She did not know even what this epithet of gipsy, which they so often cast at her, really
      meant. She remembered the old life of the Liébana, but she did not know what manner of life it
      had been; and since Phratos had left her there, no one of his tribe or of his kind had been
      seen in the little Norman town among the orchards.
The old woman grinned, trimming her lantern. 
“If you are too bad for them, you must be bad indeed! You will do very well for Paris, no
      doubt.”
And she began to count her chestnuts, lest this stranger should steal any of them.
Folle‐Farine took no notice of the words.
“Will you show me which is the road to take?” she
       asked. Meanwhile the street boy had brought three or four
      of his comrades to stare at her; and they were dancing round her with grotesque grimace, and
      singing, “Houpe là, Houpe là! Burn her for a witch!”
The woman directed her which roads to go as well as she could for the falling darkness, and
      she thanked the woman and went. The street children ran at her heels like little curs, yelling
      and hissing foul language; but she ran too, and was swifter than they, and outstripped them,
      the hardy training of her limbs standing her in good service.
How far she ran, or what streets she traversed, she could not tell; the chestnut‐seller had
      said. “Leave the pole‐star behind you,” and the star was shining behind her always, and she
      ran south steadily.
Great buildings, lighted casements, high stone walls, groups of people, troopers drinking,
      girls laughing, men playing dominoes in the taverns, women chattering in the coffee‐houses, a
      line of priests going to a death‐bed with the bell ringing before the Host, a line of soldiers
      filing through great doors as the drums beat the return into barracks,—thousands of these
      pictures glowed in her path a moment, with the next to fade and give place to others. But she
      looked neither to the right or left, and held on straightly for the south.
Once or twice a man halloed after her, or a soldier tried to stop her. Once, going through
      the gateway in the southern wall, a sentinel challenged her, and levelled his bayonet only a
      second too late. But she eluded them all by the swiftness of her apparition, and she got out
      safe beyond the barriers of the town, and on to the road that led to the country,—a road quiet
      and white in the moonlight, and bordered on either side with the tall poplars and the dim,
      bare, reapen fields which looked to her like dear familiar friends.
It was lonely, and she sat down on a stone by the wayside and rested. She had no hesitation
      in what she was doing. He had gone south, and she would go likewise; that she might fail to
      find him there, never occurred to her. Of what a city was she had not yet any conception; her
      sole measurement of one was the little towns whither she had driven the mules to sell the
      fruits and the fowls for Flamma.

To have been cheated of Paris, and to find herself thus far distant from it appalled her,
      and made her heart sink.
But it had no power to make her hesitate in the course she took. She had no fear and no
      doubt: the worst thing that could have come to her had come already; the silence and the
      strength of absolute despair were on her.
Besides, a certain thrill of liberty was on her. For the first time in all her life she was
      absolutely free, with the freedom of the will and of the body both.
She was no longer captive to one place, bondslave to one tyranny; she was no longer driven
      with curses and commands, and yoked and harnessed every moment of her days. To her, with the
      blood of a tameless race in her, there was a certain force and elasticity in this deliverance
      from bondage, that lifted some measure of her great woe off her. She could not be absolutely
      wretched so long as the open sky was above her, and the smell of the fields about her, and on
      her face the breath of the blowing winds.
She had that love which is as the bezoar stone of fable—an amulet that makes all wounds
      unfelt, and death a thing to smile at in derision. Besides, there was in her veins a certain
      thrill of the sweetness of liberty. She was no longer captive to one place, or bound in the
      old bonds of servitude. She was free—with the freedom of the will and of the body.
Without some strong impulsion from without, she might never have cut herself adrift from the
      tyranny that had held her down from childhood; and even the one happiness she had known had
      been but little more than the exchange of one manner of slavery for another.
But now she was free—absolutely free; and in the calm, cool night—in the dusk and the
      solitude, with the smell of the fields around her, and above her the stars, she knew it and
      was glad,—glad even amidst the woe of loneliness and the agony of abandonment.
She sat awhile by the roadside and counted his gold by the gleam of the stars, and put it
      away securely in her girdle, and drank from the brook beside her, and tried to eat a little of
      the bread which the old boat‐man had given her as her wages, with three pieces of copper
      money.

But the crust choked her; she felt hot with fever, and her throat was parched and full of
      pain.
The moon was full upon her where she sat; the red and white of her dress bore a strange
      look; her face was colourless, and her eyes looked but the larger and more lustrous for the
      black shadows beneath them, and the weary swollen droop of their lids.
She rested there, and pondered on the next step she had best take.
A woman came past her, and stopped and looked.
The moonlight was strong upon her face.
“You are a handsome wench,” said the wayfarer, who was elderly and of pleasant visage; “too
      handsome, a vast deal, to be sitting alone like one lost. What is the matter?”
“Nothing!” she answered.
The old reserve clung to her and fenced her secret in, as the prickles of a cactus hedge may
      fence in the magnolia’s flower of snow.
“What, then? Have you a home?”
“No.”
“Eh! You must have a lover?”
Folle‐Farine’s lips grew whiter, and she shrank a little; but she answered, steadily:
“No.”
“No! And at your age; and handsome as a ripe, red apple,—with your skin of satin, and your
      tangle of hair! Fie, for shame! Are the men blind? Where do you rest to‐night?”
“I am going on—south.”
“And mean to walk all night? Pooh! Come home with me, and sup and sleep. I live hard by,
      just inside the walls.”
Folle‐Farine opened her great eyes wide. It was the first creature who had ever offered her
      hospitality. It was an old woman, too; there could be nothing but kindness in the offer, she
      thought; and kindness was so strange to her, that it troubled her more than did cruelty.
“You are good,” she said, gratefully,—“very good; but I cannot come.”
“Cannot come! Why, then?”
“Because I must go on to Paris; I cannot lost an hour. Nevertheless, it is good of you.”

The old woman laughed roughly.
“Oh, ho! the red apple must go to Paris. No other market grand enough! Is that it?”
“I do not know what you mean.”
“But stay with me to‐night. The roads are dangerous. There are vagrants and ill‐livers
      about. There are great fogs, too, in this district; and you will meet drunken soldiers and
      beggars that will rob you. Come home with me. I have a pretty little place, though poor; and
      you shall have such fare as I give my own daughter. And maybe you will see two or three of the
      young nobles. They look in for a laugh and a song—all innocent: my girls are favourites. Come,
      it is not a stone’s throw through the south gate.”
“You are too good; but I cannot come. As for the road, I am not afraid. I have a good knife,
      and I am strong.”
She spoke in all unconsciousness, in her heart thankful to this, the first human creature
      that had ever offered her shelter or good nature.
The woman darted one sharp look at her, venomous as an adder’s bite; then bade her a short
      good‐night, and went on her way to the gates of the town. Folle‐Farine rose up and walked on,
      taking her own southward road.
She was ignorant of any peril that she had escaped. She did not know that the only animals
      which prey upon the young of their own sex and kind are women.
She was very tired; long want of sleep, anguish, and bodily fatigue made her dull, and too
      exhausted to keep long upon her feet. She looked about her for some place of rest; and she
      knew that if she did not husband her strength, it might fail her ere she reached him, and
      stretch her on a sick‐bed in some hospital of the poor.
She passed two of three cottages standing by the roadside, with light gleaming through their
      shutters; but she did not knock at any one of them. She was afraid of spending her three
      copper coins; and she was too proud to seek food or lodging as an alms.
By‐and‐by when came to a little shed, standing where no house was. She looked in it, and saw
      it full of the last season’s hay, dry and sweet‐smelling, tenanted only by a cat rolled round
      in slumber.
She crept into it, and laid herself down and slept, the
       bright starry skies shining on her through the open space
      that served for entrance, the clatter of a little brook under the poplar trees the only sound
      upon the quiet air.
Footsteps went past twice or thrice, and once a waggon rolled lumbering by; but no one came
      thither to disturb her, and she sank into a fitful heavy sleep.
At daybreak she was again afoot, always on the broad road to the south‐west.
With one of her coins she bought a loaf and a draught of milk, at a hamlet through which she
      went. She was surprised to find that people spoke to her without a curse or taunt, and dealt
      with her as with any other human being.
Insensibly with the change of treatment, and with the fresh sweet air, and with the brisk
      movement that bore her on her way, her heart grew lighter, and her old dauntless spirit rose
      again.
She would find him, she thought, as soon as ever she entered Paris; and she would watch over
      him, and only go near him if he needed her. And then, and then—.
But her thoughts went no further. She shut the future out from her; it appalled her. Only
      one thing was clear before her—that she would get him the greatness that he thirsted for, if
      any payment of her body or her soul, life or death, could purchase it.
A great purpose nerves the life it lives in, so that no personal terrors can assail, nor any
      minor woes afflict it. Hunger, thirst, fatigue, hardship, danger,—these were all in her path,
      and she had each in turn; but not one of them unnerved her.
To reach Paris, she felt that she would have walked through flames, or fasted forty
      days.
For two days and nights she went on—days cloudless, nights fine and mild; then came a day of
      storm—sharp hail and loud thunder. She went on through it all the same, the agony in her heart
      made the glare of lightning and the roar of winds no more to her than the sigh of an April
      breeze over a primrose bank.
She had various fortunes on her way.
A party of tramps crossing a meadow set on her, and tried to insult her; she showed them her
      knife, and with the blade bare against her throat, made them fall back, and scattered
      them.

A dirty and tattered group of gipsies, squatting in a dry ditch under a tarpaulin, hailed
      her, and wanted her to join with them and share their broken food. She eluded them with
      disgust; they were not like the gitanos of Liébana, and she took them to be beggars and
      thieves, as indeed, they were.
At a little wayside cabin, a girl, with a bright rosy face, spoke softly and cheerily to
      her, and bade her rest awhile on the bench in the porch under the vines; and brought out some
      white pigeons to show her; and asked her, with interest, whence she came. And she, in her
      fierceness and her shyness, was touched, and wondered greatly that any female thing could be
      thus good.
She met an old man with an organ on his back, and a monkey on his shoulder. He was old and
      infirm. She carried his organ for him awhile, as they went along the same road; and he was
      gentle and kind in return, and made the route she had to take clear to her, and told her, with
      a shake of his head that Paris would either be hell or heaven to such as she. And she,
      hearing, smiled a little, for the first time since she had left Yprès, and
      thought—heaven or hell, what would it matter which, so long as she found Arslàn?
Of Dante she had never heard; but the spirit of the “questi chi mai
       da me non piu diviso” dwells untaught in every great love.
Once, at night, a vagrant tried to rob her, having watched her count the gold and notes
      which she carried in her girdle. He dragged her to a lonely place, and snatched at the red
      sash, grasping the money with it; but she was too quick for him, and beat him off in such a
      fashion that he slunk away limping, and told his fellows to beware of her; for she had the
      spring of a cat, and the stroke of a swan’s wing.
On the whole, the world seemed better to her than it had done: the men were seldom insolent,
      taking warning from the look in her flashing eyes and the straight carriage of her flexible
      frame; and the women more than once were kind.
Many peasants passed her on their market‐mules, and many carriers’ carts and farm‐waggons
      went by along the sunny roads.

Sometimes their drivers called to her to get up, and gave her a lift of a league or two on
      their piles of grass, or straw, or amongst their crates of cackling poultry, as they made
      their slow way between the lines of the trees, with their horses nodding heavily under the
      weight of their uncouth harness.
All this while she never touched the gold that he had given her. Very little food sufficed
      to her: she had been hardly reared; and for the little she had she worked always, on her
      way.
A load carried, a lost sheep fetched in, some wood hewn and stacked, a crying calf fed, a
      cabbage‐patch dug or watered, these got her the simple fare which she fed on; and for lodging
      she was to none indebted, preferring to lie down by the side of the cows in their stalls, or
      under a stack against some little blossoming garden.
The people had no prejudice against her: she found few foes, when she had left the district
      that knew the story of Reine Flamma; they were, on the contrary, amused with her strange
      picture‐like look, and awed with the sad brevity of her speech to them.
Sometimes it chanced to her to get no tasks of any sort to do, and at these times she went
      without food: touch his gold she would not.
On the road she did what good she could; she walked a needless league to carry home a child
      who had broken his leg in a lonely lane; she sought, in a foggy night, for the straying goat
      of a wretched woman; she saved an infant from the flames in a little cabin burning in the
      midst of the green fields: she did what came in her path to do. For her heart was half broken;
      and this was her way of prayer.
So, by tedious endeavour, she won her passage wearily towards Paris.
She had been nine days on the road, losing her way at times, and having often wearily to
      retrace her steps.
On the tenth day she came to a little town lying in a green hollow amidst woods.
It had an ancient church; the old sweet bells were ringing a last midday mass; a crumbling
      fortress of the Angevine kings gave it majesty and shadow; it was full of flowers and of
      trees, and had quaint, quiet, grey streets,
       hilly and shady, that made her think of the streets round
      about the cathedral of her mother’s birthplace, away north‐westward in the white
      sea‐mists.
When she entered it, noon had just sounded from all its many clocks and chimes. The weather
      was hot, and she was very tired. She had not eaten any food, save some berries and green
      leaves, for more than forty hours. She had been refused anything to do in all places; and she
      had no money—except that gold of his.
There was a little tavern, vine‐shaded, and bright with a late‐flowering rose that hid its
      casements. She asked there, timidly, if there were any task she might do,—to fetch water, to
      sweep, to break wood, to drive or to stable a mule or a horse?
They took her to be a gipsy; they ordered her roughly to be gone.
Through the square window she could see food—a big juicy melon cut in halves, sweet yellow
      cakes, warm and crisp from the oven, a white chicken, cold and dressed with cresses, a jug of
      milk, an abundance of bread. And her hunger was very great.
Nine days of sharper privation than even that to which she had been inured in the penury of
       Yprès had made her cheeks hollow and her limbs fleshless; and a continual
      consuming heat and pain gnawed at her chest.
She sat on a bench that was free to all wayfarers, and looked at the food in the
      tavern‐kitchen. It tempted her with the animal ravenousness begotten by long fast. She wanted
      to fly at it as a starved dog flies. A rosy‐faced woman cut up the chicken on a china dish,
      singing.
Folle‐Farine, outside, looked at her, and took courage from her smiling face.
“Will you give me a little work?” she murmured. “Anything—anything—so that I may get
      bread.”
“You are a gipsy,” answered the woman, ceasing to smile. “Go to your own folk.”
And she would not offer her even a plate of broken victuals.
Folle‐Farine rose and walked wearily away. She could not bear the sight of the food; she
      felt that if she looked at it longer she would spring on it like a wolf. But to use his gold
      never occurred to her. She would have bitten her
       tongue through in famine ere she would have taken one coin
      of it.
As she went, being weak from long hunger and the stroke of the sun‐rays, she stumbled and
      fell. She recovered herself quickly; but in the fall the money had shaken itself from her
      sash, and been scattered with a ringing sound among the stones.
The woman in the tavern‐window raised a loud cry.
“Oh, hè! the wicked liar!—to beg bread while her waistband is stuffed like a turkey with
      chestnuts! What a rogue to try and dupe poor honest people like us! Take her to prison.”
The woman cried loud; there were half‐a‐dozen stout serving‐wenches and stable‐lads about in
      the little street, with several boys and children. Indignant at the thought of an attempted
      fraud upon their charity, and amazed at the flash and the fall of the money, they rushed on
      her with shrieks of rage and scorn, with missiles of turf and stone, with their brooms raised
      aloft, or their dogs set to rage at her.
She had not time to gather up the coins and notes; she could only stand over them and defend
      them. Two beggar‐boys made snatch at the tempting heap; she drew her knife to daunt them with
      the sight of it. The people shrieked at sight of the bare blade; a woman selling honeycomb and
      lots of honey at a bench under a lime‐tree raised a cry that she had been robbed. It was not
      true; but a street crowd always loves a lie, and never risks spoiling, by sifting, it.
The beggar‐lads and the two serving‐wenches and an old virago from a cottage‐door near set
      upon her, and scrambled together to drive her away from the gold and share it. Resolute to
      defend it at any peril, she set her heel down on it, and, with her back against the tree,
      stood firm; not striking, but with the point of the knife outward.
One of the boys, maddened to get the gold, darted forward, twisted his limbs round her, and
      struggled with her for its possession. In the struggle he wounded himself upon the steel. His
      arm bled largely; he filled the air with his shrieks; the people, furious, accused her of his
      murder.
Before five minutes had gone by she was seized, overpowered by numbers, cuffed, kicked,
      upbraided with every
       name of infamy, and dragged as a criminal up the little
      steep stony street in the blaze of the noonday sun, whilst on each side the townsfolk looked
      out from their doorways and their balconies, and cried out:
“What is it? Oh, hè! A brawling gipsy, who has stolen something, and has stabbed poor little
      Fréki, the blind man’s son, because he found her out? Au violon!—au
       violon! What is it?”
To which the groups called back again, “Yes. A thief of a gipsy, begging alms while she had
      stolen gold on her. She has stabbed poor little Fréki, the blind cobbler’s grandson: yes; we
      think he is dead.”
And the people above, in horror, lifted their hands and eyes, and shouted afresh, “Au violon!—au violon!”
Meanwhile the honey‐seller ran beside them, crying aloud that she had been robbed of five
      broad gold pieces.
It was a little sunny country‐place, very green with trees and grass, filled usually with
      few louder sounds than the cacklings of geese and the dripping of well‐water.
But its stones were sharp and rough; its voices were shrill and fierce; its gossips were
      cruel and false of tongue; its justice was very small, and its credulity was measureless. A
      girl, bare‐foot and bare‐headed, with eyes of the East, and a knife in her girdle, teeth that
      met in their youngsters’ wrists, and gold pieces that scattered like dust from her bosom,—such
      an one could have no possible innocence in their eyes, such an one was condemned so soon as
      she was looked at, when she was dragged amongst them up their hilly central way.
She had had money on her, and she had asked for food in the plea of being starved; that was
      fraud plain enough, even for those who were free to admit that the seller of the honey‐pots
      had never been over‐true of speech, and had never owned so much as five gold pieces ever since
      her first bees had sucked their first spray of heath‐bells.
No one had any mercy on a creature who had money, and yet asked for work; as to her guilt,
      there could be no question.
She was hurried before the village tribune, and cast into the cell where all accused waited
      their judgement.
It was a dusky, loathsome place, dripping with damp, half underground, strongly grilled with
      iron, and smelling
       foully from the brandy and strong smoke of two drunkards
      who had been its occupants the previous night.
There they had left her, taking away her knife and her money.
She did not resist. It was not her nature to rebel futilely; and they had fallen on her six
      to one, and had bound her safely with cords ere they had dragged her away to punishment.
The little den was visible to the highway through a square low grating. Through this they
      came and stared, and mouthed, and mocked, and taunted, and danced before her. To bait a gipsy
      was fair pastime.
Everywhere, from door to door, the blind cobbler, with his little son, and the woman who
      sold honey told their tale,—how she had stabbed the little lad and stolen the gold that the
      brave bees had brought their mistress, and begged for food when she had money enough on her to
      buy a rich man’s feast. It was a tale to enlist against her all the hardest animosities of the
      poor. The village rose against her in all its little homes as though she had borne fire and
      sword into its midst.
If the arm of the law had not guarded the entrance of her prison‐cell, the women would have
      stoned her to death, or dragged her out to drown in the pond:—she was worse than a murderess
      in their sight; and one weak man, thinking to shelter her a little from their rage, quoted
      against her her darkest crime when he pleaded for mercy for her because she was young and was
      so handsome.
The long hot day of torment passed slowly by.
Outside there were cool woods, flower‐filled paths, broad fields of grass, children tossing
      blow‐balls down the wind, lovers counting the leaves of yellow‐eyed autumn daisies; but within
      there were only foul smells, intense nausea, cruel heats, the sting of a thousand insects, the
      buzz of a hundred carrion‐flies, muddy water, and black mouldy bread.
She held her silence. She would not let her enemies see that they hurt her.
When they day had gone down, and the people had tired of their sport and left her a little
      while, an old feeble man stole timidly to her, glancing round lest any should see his charity
      and quote is as a crime, and tendered her through
       the bars with a gentle hand a little ripe autumnal fruit
      upon a cool green leaf.
The kindness made the tears start to eyes too proud to weep for pain.
She took the grapes, and thanked him lovingly and thankfully; cooled her aching, burning,
      dust‐drenched throat with their fragrant moisture.
“Hush! it is nothing,” he whispered, frightenedly, glancing over his shoulder lest any
      should see. “But tell me—tell me—why did you say you starved when you had all that gold?”
“I did starve,” she answered him.
“But why—with all that gold?”
“It was another’s.”
The old man stared at her, trembling and amazed.
“What—what! die of hunger and keep your hands off money in your girdle?”
A dreary smile came on her face.
“What! is that inhuman too?”
“Inhuman?” he murmured. “Oh child—oh child, tell any tale you will, save such a tale as
      that.”
And he stole away sorrowful, because sure that for his fruit of charity she had given him
      back a lie.
He shambled away, afraid that his neighbours should see the little thing which he had
      done.
She was left alone.
It began to grow dark. She felt scorched with fever, and her head throbbed. Long hunger,
      intense fatigue, and all the agony of thought in which she had struggled on her way, had their
      reaction on her. She shivered where she sat on the damp straw which they had cast upon the
      stones; and strange noises sang in her ears, and strange lights glimmered and flashed before
      her eyes. She did not know what ailed her.
The dogs came and smelt at her, and one little early robin sang a twilight song in an
      elder‐bush near. These were the only things that had any pity on her.
By‐and‐by, when it was quite night, they opened the grated door and thrust in another
      captive, a vagrant whom they had found drunk or delirious on the high road, and whom they
      locked up for the night, that on the morrow they might determine what to do with him.

He threw himself heavily forward as he was pushed in by the old soldier whose place it was
      to guard the miserable den.
She shrank away into the furthest corner of the den, and crouched there, breathing heavily,
      and staring with dull, dilated eyes.
She thought—surely they could not mean to leave them there alone, all the night through, in
      the horrible darkness?
The slamming of the iron door answered her; and the old soldier, as he turned the rusty key
      in the lock, grumbled that the world was surely at a pretty pass, when two tramps became too
      coy to roost together. And he stumbled up the ladder‐like stairs of the guard‐house to his own
      little chamber; and there, smoking and drinking, and playing dominoes with a comrade,
      dismissed the prisoners from his recollection.
Meanwhile, the man whom he had thrust into the cell was stretched where he had fallen, drunk
      or insensible, and moaning heavily.
She, crouching against the wall, as though praying the stones to yield and hold her, gazed
      at him with horror and pity that together strove in the confusion of her dizzy brain, and made
      her dully wonder whether she were wicked thus to shrink in loathing from a creature in
      distress so like her own.
The bright moon rose on the other side of the trees beyond the grating; it fell across the
      figure of the vagrant whom they had locked in with her, as in the wild‐beast shows of old they
      locked a lion with an antelope in the same cage—out of sport.
She saw the looming massive shadow of an immense form, crouched like a couching beast; she
      saw the fire of burning, wide‐open, sullen eyes; she saw the restless, feeble gesture of two
      lean hands, that clutched at the barren stones with the futile action of a chained vulture
      clutching at his rock; she saw that the man suffered horribly, and she tried to pity him—tried
      not to shrink from him—tried to tell herself that he might be as guiltless as was herself. But
      she could not prevail; nature, instinct, youth, sex, sickness, exhaustion, all conquered her,
      and broke her strength. She recoiled from the unbearable loathsomeness of such association;
      she sprang to the grated
       aperture, and seized the iron in her hands, and shook it
      with al her might, and tore at it, and bruised her chest and arms against it, and clung to it
      convulsively, shriek after shriek pealing from her lips.
No one heard, or no one answered to her prayer.
A stray dog came and howled in unison; the moon sailed on behind the trees; the old soldier
      above slept over his toss of brandy; at the only dwelling near they were dancing at a bridal,
      and had no ear to hear.
The passionate outcries wailed themselves to silence on her trembling mouth; her strained
      hands gave way from their hold on the irons; she grew silent from sheer exhaustion, and
      dropped in a heap at the foot of the iron door, clinging to it, and crushed against it, and
      turning her face to the night without, feeling some little sense of solace in the calm, clear
      moon;—some little sense of comfort in the near presence of the dog.
Meanwhile the dusky prostrate form of the man had not stirred. He had not spoken, save to
      curse heaven and earth and every living thing. He had not ceased to glare at her with eyes
      that had the red light of a tiger’s in their pain.
He was a man of superb stature and frame; he was worn by disease and delirium, but he had in
      him a wild, leonine, tawny beauty still. His clothes were of rags, and his whole look was of
      wretchedness; yet there was about him a certain reckless majesty and splendour still, as the
      scattered beams of the white moonlight broke themselves upon him.
Of a sudden he spoke aloud, with a glitter of terrible laughter on his white teeth and his
      flashing eyes. He was delirious, and had no consciousness of where he was.
“The fourth bull I had killed that Easter day. Look! do you see? It was a red Andalusian. He
      lamed three picadors, and ripped the bellies of eight horses,—a brave bull; but I was one too
      many for him. She was there. All the winter she had flouted over me and taunted me; all the
      winter she had cast her scorn at me—the beautiful brown thing, with her cruel eyes. But she
      was there when I slew the great red bull—straight above there, looking over her fan. Do you
      see? And when my sword went up to the hilt in his throat, and the brave blood spouted, she
       laughed such a little sweet laugh, and cast her yellow
      jessamine flower at me, down in the blood and the sand there. And that night the red bull
      died, the rope was thrown from the balcony! So—so! Only a summer ago; only a summer ago!” Then
      he laughed loud again; and, laughing, sang—

“Avez‐vous vu en Barcelonne
Une belle‐dame, au sein bruni,
Pâle comme un beau soir d’automne?
C’est ma maitresse, ma lionne,
La Marchesa d’Amagüi.”

The rich loud challenge of the love‐song snapped short in two. With a groan and a curse he
      flung himself on the mud floor, and clutched at it with his empty hands.
“Wine!—wine!” he moaned, lying athirst there as the red bull had lain on the sands of the
      circus; longing for the purple draughts of his old feast‐nights, as the red bull had longed
      for the mountain‐streams, so cold and strong, of his own Andalusian birthplace.
Then he laughed again, and sang old songs of Spain, broken and marred by discord—their
      majestic melodies wedded strangely to many a stave of lewd riot and of amorous verse.
Then for awhile he was quiet, moaning dully, staring upward at the white face of the
      moon.
After a while he mocked it—the cold, chaste thing that was the meek trickster of so many
      mole‐eyed lords.
Through the terror and the confusion of her mind, with the sonorous melody of the tongue,
      with the flaming darkness of his eyes, with the wild barbaric dissolute grandeur of this
      shattered manhood, vague memories floated, distorted and intangible, before her.
Of deep forests whose shade was cool even in midsummer and midday; of glancing torrents
      rushing through their beds of stone; of mountain snows flushing in sunset toll the hues of the
      mountain roses that grew by millions by the river‐water; of wondrous nights, sultry and
      serene, in which women with flashing glances and bare breasts danced with their spangled
      anklets glittering in the rays of the moon; of roofless palaces where the Crescent still
      glistened amidst the colours of the walls; of marble courts where only the oleander kept pomp
      and the wild fig‐vine held possession;
       of a dead nation which at midnight thronged through the
      tombs of its kings, and passed in shadowy hosts through the fated land which had rejected the
      faith and the empire of Islam; sowing as they went upon the blood‐soaked soil of Spain the
      vengeance of the dead in pestilence, in anarchy, in barren passions, in endless riot and
      revolt, so that no sovereign should ever sit in peace on the ruined throne of the Moslem, and
      no light shine ever again upon the people whose boast it once had been on them the sun in
      heaven never set:—all these memories floated before her, and only served to make her fear more
      ghastly, her horror more unearthly.
There he lay delirious—a madman chained there at her feet, so close in the little den, that,
      shrink as she would against the wall, she could barely keep from the touch of his hands as
      they were flung forth in the air, from the scorch of his breath as he raved and cursed.
And there was no light except the fire in his eyes; except the flicker of the moonbeam
      through the leaves.
She spent her strength in piteous shrieks. They were the first cries that had ever broken
      from her lips for human aid; and they were vain. The guard above slept heavy with brandy and a
      dotard’s dreams. The village was not aroused. What cared any of its sleepers how these
      outcasts fared?
She crouched in the farthest corner, when her voice had spent itself in the passion of
      appeal.
The night—would it ever end?
Beside its horror, all the wretchedness and bondage of her old life seemed like peace and
      freedom.
Writhing in pain and frenzy, the wounded drunkard struck her—all unconscious of the
      blow—across her eyes, and fell, contorted and senseless, with his head upon her knees.
He had ceased to shout his amorous songs, and vaunt his lustful triumphs. His voice was
      hollow in his throat, and babbled with a strange sound, low and fast and inarticulate.
“In the little green wood—in the little green wood,” he muttered. “Hark! do you hear the
      mill‐water run? She looked so white and so cold; and they all called her a saint. What could a
      man do but kill that? Does she cry out
       against me? You say so? You lie. You lie—be you devil or
      god. You sit on a great white throne and judge us all. So they say. You can send us to hell? .
      . . . Well, do. You shall never wring a word from her to my hurt. She thinks I
      killed the child? Nay—that I swear. Phratos knew, I think. But he is dead;—so they say. Ask
      him . . . . My brown queen, who saw me kill the red bull,—are you there too? Aye. How the
      white jewels shine in your breast! Stoop a little, and kiss me. So! Your mouth burns; and the
      yellow jessamine flower—there is a snake in it. Look! You love me? —oh‐ho!—what does your
      priest say, and your lord? Love!—so many of you swore that. But she,—she standing next to her
      god there,—I hurt her most, and yet she alone of you all says nothing!”
* * * * * *
When, at daylight, the people unbarred the prison‐door, they found the sightless face of the
      dead mean lying full in the light of the sun: beside him the girl crouched with a senseless
      stare in the horror of her eyes, and on her lips a ghastly laugh.
For Folle‐Farine had entered at last into her Father’s kingdom.
