
CHAPTER II.
On quitting the dining-room, the Duchesse de Tarascon said to her host, on whose arm she was
      leaning, “Of course you and I must go with the stream. But is not all the fine talk that has
      passed to-day at your table, and in which we too have joined, a sort of hypocrisy? I may say
      this to you; I would say it to no other.”
“And I say to you, Madame la Duchesse, that which I would say to no other. Thinking over it
      as I sit alone, I find myself making a ‘terrible hazard;’ but when I go abroad and become
      infected by the general enthusiasm, I pluck up gaiety of spirit, and whisper to myself, ‘True,
      but it may be an enormous gain.’ To get the left bank of the Rhine is a trifle; but to check
      in our next neighbour a growth which a few years hence would overtop us,—that is no trifle.
      And, be the gain worth the hazard or not, could the Emperor, could any Government likely to
      hold its own for a week, have declined to take the chance of the die?”
The Duchesse mused a moment, and meanwhile the two seated themselves on a divan in the
      corner of the salon. Then she said very slowly—
“No Government that held its tenure on popular suffrage could have done so. But if the
      Emperor had retained the personal authority which once allowed the intellect of one man to
      control and direct the passions of many, I think the war would have been averted. I have
      reason to know that the Emperor gave his emphatic support to the least bellicose members of
      the Council, and that Gramont’s speech did not contain the passage that precipitates
      hostilities when the Council in which it was framed broke up. These fatal Ministers found the
      Chamber, and the reports of the popular excitement which could not be resisted without
      imminent danger of revolution. It is Paris that has forced the war on the Emperor. But enough
      of this subject. What must be, must, and, as you say, the gain may be greater than the hazard.
      I come to something else you whispered to me before we went in to dinner,—a sort of complaint
      which wounds me sensibly. You say I had assisted to a choice of danger and possibly of death a
      very distant connection of mine, who might have been a very near connection of yours. You mean
      Alain de Rochebriant?”
“Yes; I accept him as a suitor for the hand of my only daughter.”
“I am so glad, not for your sake so much as for his. No one can know him well without
      appreciating in him the finest qualities of the finest order of the French noble; but having
      known your pretty Valerie so long, my congratulations are for the man who can win her.
      Meanwhile, hear my explanation: when I promised Alain any interest I can command for the grade
      of officer in a regiment of Mobiles, I knew not that he had formed, or was likely to form,
      ties or duties to keep him at home. I withdraw my promise.”
“No, Duchesse, fulfil it. I should be disloyal indeed if I robbed a sovereign under whose
      tranquil and prosperous reign I have acquired, with no dishonour, the fortune which Order
      proffers to Commerce, of one gallant defender in the hour of need. And, speaking frankly, if
      Alain were really my son, I think I am Frenchman enough to remember that France is my
      mother.”
“Say no more, my friend—say no more,” cried the Duchesse, with the warm blood of the heart
      rushing through all the delicate coatings of pearl-powder. “If every Frenchman felt as you do;
      if in this Paris of ours all hostilities of class may merge in the one thought of the common
      country; if in French hearts there yet thrills the same sentiment as that which, in the
      terrible days when all other ties were rent asunder, revered France as mother, and rallied her
      sons to her aid against the confederacy of Europe,—why, then, we need not grow pale with
      dismay at the sight of a Prussian needle-gun. Hist! look yonder: is not that a tableau of
      Youth in Arcady? Worlds rage around, and Love, unconcerned, whispers to Love!” The Duchesse
      here pointed to a corner of the adjoining room in which Alain and Valerie sat apart, he
      whispering into her ear; her cheek downcast, and, even seen at that distance, brightened by
      the delicate tenderness of its blushes.
