
CHAPTER VIII.
When the news of the disastrous day at Sedan reached Paris, the first effect was that of
      timid consternation. There were a few cries of Decheance! fewer still of Vive la Republique
      among the motley crowds; but they were faint, and chiefly by ragged gamins. A small body
      repaired to Trochu and offered him the sceptre, which he politely declined. A more important
      and respectable body—for it comprised the majority of the Corps Legislatif—urged Palikao to
      accept the temporary dictatorship, which the War Minister declined with equal politeness. In
      both these overtures it was clear that the impulse of the proposers was towards any form of
      government rather than republican. The sergens de ville were sufficient that day to put down
      riot. They did make a charge on a mob, which immediately ran away.
The morning of that day the Council of Ten were summoned by Lebeau—minus only Rameau, who
      was still too unwell to attend, and the Belgian, not then at Paris; but their place was
      supplied by the two travelling members, who had been absent from the meeting before recorded.
      These were conspirators better known in history than those I have before described;
      professional conspirators—personages who from their youth upwards had done little else but
      conspire. Following the discreet plan pursued elsewhere throughout this humble work, I give
      their names other than they bore. One, a very swarthy and ill-favoured man, between forty and
      fifty, I call Paul Grimm—by origin a German, but by rearing and character French; from the
      hair on his head, staring up rough and ragged as a bramblebush, to the soles of small narrow
      feet, shod with dainty care, he was a personal coxcomb, and spent all he could spare on his
      dress. A clever man, not ill-educated—a vehement and effective speaker at a club. Vanity and
      an amorous temperament had made him a conspirator, since he fancied he interested the ladies
      more in that capacity than any other. His companion, Edgar Ferrier, would have been a
      journalist, only hitherto his opinions had found no readers; the opinions were those of Marat.
      He rejoiced in thinking that his hour for glory, so long deferred, had now arrived. He was
      thoroughly sincere: his father and grandfather had died in a madhouse. Both these men,
      insignificant in ordinary times, were likely to become of terrible importance in the crisis of
      a revolution. They both had great power with the elements that form a Parisian mob. The
      instructions given to these members of the Council by Lebeau were brief: they were summed up
      in the one word, Decheance. The formidable nature of a council apparently so meanly
      constituted became strikingly evident at that moment, because it was so small in number, while
      each one of these could put in movement a large section of the populace; secondly, because,
      unlike a revolutionary club or a numerous association, no time was wasted in idle speeches,
      and all were under the orders of one man of clear head and resolute purpose; and thirdly, and
      above all, because one man supplied the treasury, and money for an object desired was
      liberally given and promptly at hand. The meeting did not last ten minutes, and about two
      hours afterwards its effects were visible. From Montmartre and Belleville and Montretout
      poured streams of ouvriers, with whom Armand Monnier was a chief, and the Medecin des Pauvres
      an oracle. Grimm and Ferrier headed other detachments that startled the well-dressed idlers on
      the Boulevards. The stalwart figure of the Pole was seen on the Place de la Concorde, towering
      amidst other refugees, amid which glided the Italian champion of humanity. The cry of
      Decheance became louder. But as yet there were only few cries of Vive la Republique!—such a
      cry was not on the orders issued by Lebeau. At midnight the crowd round the hall of the Corps
      Legislatif is large: cries of La Dechaeance loud—a few cries, very feeble, of Vive la
      Republique!
What followed on the 4th—the marvellous audacity with which half-a-dozen lawyers belonging
      to a pitiful minority in a Chamber elected by universal suffrage walked into the Hotel de
      Ville and said, “The Republic is established, and we are its Government,” history has told too
      recently for me to narrate. On the evening of the 5th the Council of Ten met again: the Pole;
      the Italian radiant; Grimm and Ferrier much excited and rather drunk; the Medecin des Pauvres
      thoughtful; and Armand Monnier gloomy. A rumour has spread that General Trochu, in accepting
      the charge imposed on him, has exacted from the Government the solemn assurance of respect for
      God, and for the rights of Family and Property. The Atheist is very indignant at the assent of
      the Government to the first proposition; Monnier equal indignant at the assent to the second
      and third. What has that honest ouvrier conspired for?—what has he suffered for?—of late
      nearly starved for?—but to marry another man’s wife, getting rid of his own, and to legalise a
      participation in the property of his employer,—and now he is no better off than before. “There
      must be another revolution,” he whispers to the Atheist.
“Certainly,” whispers back the Atheist; “he who desires to better this world must destroy
      all belief in another.” The conclave was assembled when Lebeau entered by the private door. He
      took his place at the head of the table; and, fixing on the group eyes that emitted a cold
      gleam through the spectacles, thus spoke:
“Messieurs, or Citoyens, which ye will—I no longer call ye confreres—you have disobeyed or
      blundered my instructions. On such an occasion disobedience and blunder are crimes equally
      heinous.”
Angry murmurs.
“Silence! Do not add mutiny to your other offences. My instructions were simple and short.
      Aid in the abolition of the Empire. Do not aid in any senseless cry for a Republic or any
      other form of government. Leave that to the Legislature. What have you done? You swelled the
      crowd that invaded the Corps Ligislatif. You, Dombinsky, not even a Frenchman, dare to mount
      the President’s rostrum, and brawl forth your senseless jargon. You, Edgar Ferrier, from whom
      I expected better, ascend the tribune, and invite the ruffians in the crowd to march to the
      prisons and release the convicts; and all of you swell the mob at the Hotel de Ville, and
      inaugurate the reign of folly by creating an oligarchy of lawyers to resist the march of
      triumphal armies. Messieurs, I have done with you. You are summoned for the last time: the
      Council is dissolved.”
With these words Lebeau put on his hat, and turned to depart. But the Pole, who was seated
      near him, sprang to his feet, exclaiming, “Traitor, thou shalt not escape! Comrades, he wants
      to sell us!”
“I have a right to sell you at least, for I bought you, and a very bad bargain I made,” said
      Lebeau, in a tone of withering sarcasm.
“Liar!” cried the Pole, and seized Lebeau by the left hand, while with the right he drew
      forth a revolver. Ferrier and Grimm, shouting, “A bas le renegat!” would have rushed forward
      in support of the Pole, but Monnier thrust himself between them and their intended victim,
      crying with a voice that dominated their yell, “Back!—we are not assassins.” Before he had
      finished the sentence the Pole was on his knees. With a vigour which no one could have
      expected from the seeming sexagenarian, Lebeau had caught the right arm of his assailant,
      twisted it back so mercilessly as almost to dislocate elbow and shoulder joint. One barrel of
      the revolver discharged itself harmlessly against the opposite wall, and the pistol itself
      then fell from the unnerved hand of the would-be assassin; and what with the pain and the
      sudden shock, the stalwart Dombinsky fell in the attitude of a suppliant at the feet of his
      unlooked-for vanquisher.
Lebeau released his hold, possessed himself of the pistol, pointing the barrels towards
      Edgar Ferrier, who stood with mouth agape and lifted arm arrested, and said quietly:
      “Monsieur, have the goodness to open that window.” Ferrier mechanically obeyed. “Now,
      hireling,” continued Lebeau, addressing the vanquished Pole, “choose between the door and the
      window.”
“Go, my friend,” whispered the Italian. The Pole did not utter a word; but rising nimbly,
      and rubbing his arm, stalked to the door. There he paused a moment and said, “I retire
      overpowered by numbers,” and vanished.
“Messieurs,” resumed Lebeau, calmly, “I repeat that the Council is dissolved. In fact its
      object is fulfilled more abruptly than any of us foresaw, and by means which I at least had
      been too long out of Paris to divine as possible. I now see that every aberration of reason is
      possible to the Parisians. The object that united us was the fall of the Empire. As I have
      always frankly told you, with that object achieved, separation commences. Each of us has his
      own crotchet, which differs from the other man’s. Pursue yours as you will—I pursue mine—you
      will find Jean Lebeau no more in Paris: il s’eface. Au plaisir, mais pas au revoir.”
He retreated to the masked door and disappeared.
Marc le Roux, the porter or custos of that ruinous council-hall, alarmed at the explosion of
      the pistol, had hurried into the room, and now stood unheeded by the door with mouth agape,
      while Lebeau thus curtly dissolved the assembly. But when the president vanished through the
      secret doorway, Le Roux also retreated. Hastily descending the stairs, he made as quickly as
      his legs could carry him for the mouth of the alley in the rear of the house, through which he
      knew that Lebeau must pass. He arrived, panting and breathless, in time to catch hold of the
      ex-president’s arm. “Pardon, citizen,” stammered he, “but do I understand that you have sent
      the Council of Ten to the devil?”
“I? Certainly not, my good Paul; I dismiss them to go where they like. If they prefer the
      direction you name, it is their own choice. I declined to accompany them, and I advise you not
      to do so.”
“But, citizen, have you considered what is to become of Madame? Is she to be turned out of
      the lodge? Are my wages to stop, and Madame to be left without a crust to put into her
      soup?”
“Not so bad as that; I have just paid the rent of the baraque for three months in advance,
      and there is your quarter’s pay, in advance also. My kind regards to Madame, and tell her to
      keep your skin safe from the schemes of these lunatics.” Thrusting some pieces of gold into
      the hands of the porter, Lebeau nodded his adieu, and hastened along his way.
Absorbed in his own reflections, he did not turn to look behind. But if he had, he could not
      have detected the dark form of the porter, creeping in the deep shadow of the streets with
      distant but watchful footsteps.
