
CHAPTER X.
“M. Rameau,” said De Mauleon, when the two men had reseated themselves in the salon, “I will
      honestly say that my desire is to rid myself as soon as I can of the trust of guardian to this
      young lady. Playing as I do with fortune, my only stake against her favours is my life. I feel
      as if it were my duty to see that Mademoiselle is not left alone and friendless in the world
      at my decease. I have in my mind for her a husband that I think in every way suitable: a
      handsome and brave young fellow in my battalion, of respectable birth, without any living
      relations to consult as to his choice. I have reason to believe that if Julie married him, she
      need never fear as a reproach to her antecedents. Her dot would suffice to enable him to
      realise his own wish of a country town in Normandy. And in that station, Paris and its
      temptations would soon pass from the poor child’s thoughts, as an evil dream. But I cannot
      dispose of her hand without her own consent; and if she is to be reasoned out of her fancy for
      you, I have no time to devote to the task. I come to the point, You are not the man I would
      choose for her husband. But, evidently, you are the man she would choose. Are you disposed to
      marry her? You hesitate, very naturally; I have no right to demand an immediate answer to a
      question so serious. Perhaps you will think over it, and let me know in a day or two? I take
      it for granted that if you were, as I heard, engaged before the siege to marry the Signora
      Cicogna, that engagement is annulled?”
“Why take it for granted?” asked Gustave, perplexed. “Simply because I find you here. Nay,
      spare explanations and excuses. I quite understand that you were invited to come. But a man
      solemnly betrothed to a mademoiselle like the Signora Cicogna, in a time of such dire calamity
      and peril, could scarcely allow himself to be tempted to accept the invitation of one so
      beautiful, and so warmly attached to him, as is Mademoiselle Julie; and on witnessing the
      passionate strength of that attachment, say that he cannot keep a promise not to repeat his
      visits. But if I mistake, and you are still betrothed to the Signorina, of course all
      discussion is at an end.”
Gustave hung his head in some shame, and in much bewildered doubt.
The practised observer of men’s characters, and of shifting phases of mind, glanced at the
      poor poet’s perturbed countenance with a half-smile of disdain.
“It is for you to judge how far the very love to you so ingenuously evinced by my ward—how
      far the reasons against marriage with one whose antecedents expose her to reproach—should
      influence one of your advanced opinions upon social ties. Such reasons do not appear to have
      with artists the same weight they have with the bourgeoisie. I have but to add that the
      husband of Julie will receive with her hand a dot of nearly 120,000 francs; and I have reason
      to believe that that fortune will be increased—how much, I cannot guess-when the cessation of
      the siege will allow communication with England. One word more. I should wish to rank the
      husband of my ward in the number of my friends. If he did not oppose the political opinions
      with which I identify my own career, I should be pleased to make any rise in the world
      achieved by me assist to the raising of himself. But my opinions, as during the time we were
      brought together you were made aware, are those of a practical man of the world, and have
      nothing in common with Communists, Socialists, Internationalists, or whatever sect would place
      the aged societies of Europe in Medea’s caldron of youth. At a moment like the present,
      fanatics and dreamers so abound that the number of such sinners will necessitate a general
      amnesty when order is restored. What a poet so young as you may have written or said at such a
      time will be readily forgotten and forgiven a year or two hence, provided he does not put his
      notions into violent action. But if you choose to persevere in the views you now advocate, so
      be it. They will not make poor Julie less a believer in your wisdom and genius. Only they will
      separate you from me, and a day may come when I should have the painful duty of ordering you
      to be shot—Die meliora. Think over all I have thus frankly said. Give me your answer within
      forty-eight hours; and meanwhile hold no communication with my ward. I have the honour to wish
      you good-day.”
