
CHAPTER VI.
It has now become due to Graham Vane, and to his place in the estimation of my readers, to
      explain somewhat more distinctly the nature of the quest in prosecution of which he had sought
      the aid of the Parisian police, and under an assumed name made the acquaintance of M.
      Lebeau.
The best way of discharging this duty will perhaps be to place before the reader the
      contents of the letter which passed under Graham’s eyes on the day in which the heart of the
      writer ceased to beat.
(Confidential. To be opened immediately after my death, and before the perusal of my
      will.—Richard King.)
TO GRAHAM VANE, Esq.
My DEAR GRAHAM,—By the direction on the envelope of this letter, “Before the perusal of my
      will,” I have wished to save you from the disappointment you would naturally experience if you
      learned my bequest without being prevised of the conditions which I am about to impose upon
      your honour. You will see ere you conclude this letter that you are the only man living to
      whom I could intrust the secret it contains and the task it enjoins.
You are aware that I was not born to the fortune that passed to me by the death of a distant
      relation, who had, in my earlier youth, children of his own. I was an only son, left an orphan
      at the age of sixteen with a very slender pittance. My guardians designed me for the medical
      profession. I began my studies at Edinburgh, and was sent to Paris to complete them, It so
      chanced that there I lodged in the same house with an artist named Auguste Duval, who, failing
      to gain his livelihood as a painter, in what—for his style was ambitious—is termed the
      Historical School, had accepted the humbler calling of a drawing-master. He had practised in
      that branch of the profession for several years at Tours, having a good clientele among
      English families settled there. This clientele, as he frankly confessed, he had lost from some
      irregularities of conduct. He was not a bad man, but of convivial temper, and easily led into
      temptation. He had removed to Paris a few months before I made his acquaintance. He obtained a
      few pupils, and often lost them as soon as gained. He was unpunctual and addicted to drink.
      But he had a small pension, accorded to him, he was wont to say mysteriously, by some
      high-born kinsfolk, too proud to own connection with a drawing-master, and on the condition
      that he should never name them. He never did name them to me, and I do not know to this day
      whether the story of this noble relationship was true or false. A pension, however, he did
      receive quarterly from some person or other, and it was an unhappy provision for him. It
      tended to make him an idler in his proper calling; and whenever he received the payment he
      spent it in debauch, to the neglect, while it lasted, of his pupils. This man had residing
      with him a young daughter, singularly beautiful. You may divine the rest. I fell in love with
      her,—a love deepened by the compassion with which she inspired me. Her father left her so
      frequently that, living on the same floor, we saw much of each other. Parent and child were
      often in great need,—lacking even fuel or food. Of course I assisted them to the utmost of my
      scanty means Much as I was fascinated by Louise Duval, I was not blind to great defects in her
      character. She was capricious, vain, aware of her beauty, and sighing for the pleasures or the
      gauds beyond her reach. I knew that she did not love me,—there was little, indeed, to
      captivate her fancy in a poor, thread-bare medical student,—and yet I fondly imagined that my
      own persevering devotion would at length win her affections, I spoke to her father more than
      once of my hope some day to make Louise my wife. This hope, I must frankly acknowledge, he
      never encouraged. On the contrary, he treated it with scorn,—“His child with her beauty would
      look much higher;” but be continued all the same to accept my assistance, and to sanction my
      visits. At length my slender purse was pretty well exhausted, and the luckless drawing-master
      was so harassed with petty debts that further credit became impossible. At this time I
      happened to hear from a fellow-student that his sister, who was the principal of a lady’s
      school in Cheltenham, bad commissioned him to look out for a first-rate teacher of drawing
      with whom her elder pupils could converse in French, but who should be sufficiently acquainted
      with English to make his instructions intelligible to the young. The salary was liberal, the
      school large and of high repute, and his appointment to it would open to an able teacher no
      inconsiderable connection among private families. I communicated this intelligence to Duval.
      He caught at it eagerly. He had learned at Tours to speak English fluently; and as his
      professional skill was of high order, and he was popular with several eminent artists, he
      obtained certificates as to his talents, which my fellow-student forwarded to England with
      specimens of Duval’s drawings. In a few days the offer of an engagement arrived, was accepted,
      and Duval and his daughter set out for Cheltenham. At the eve of their departure, Louise,
      profoundly dejected at the prospect of banishment to a foreign country, and placing no trust
      in her father’s reform to steady habits, evinced a tenderness for me hitherto new; she wept
      bitterly; she allowed me to believe that her tears flowed at the thought of parting with me,
      and even besought me to accompany them to Cheltenham, if only for a few days. You may suppose
      how delightedly I complied with the request. Duval had been about a week at the watering
      place, and was discharging the duties he had undertaken with such unwonted steadiness and
      regularity that I began sorrowfully to feel I had no longer an excuse for not returning to my
      studies at Paris, when the poor teacher was seized with a fit of paralysis. He lost the power
      of movement, and his mind was affected. The medical attendant called in said that he might
      linger thus for some time, but that, even if he recovered his intellect, which was more than
      doubtful, he would never be able to resume his profession. I could not leave Louise in
      circumstances so distressing,—I remained. The little money Duval had brought from Paris was
      now exhausted; and when the day on which he had been in the habit of receiving his quarter’s
      pension came round, Louise was unable even to conjecture how it was to be applied for. It
      seems he had always gone for it in person; but to whom he went was a secret which he had never
      divulged, and at this critical juncture his mind was too enfeebled even to comprehend us when
      we inquired. I had already drawn from the small capital on the interest of which I had
      maintained myself; I now drew out most of the remainder. But this was a resource that could
      not last long. Nor could I, without seriously compromising Louise’s character, be constantly
      in the house with a girl so young, and whose sole legitimate protector was thus afflicted.
      There seemed but one alternative to that of abandoning her altogether,—namely, to make her my
      wife, to conclude the studies necessary to obtain my diploma, and purchase some partnership in
      a small country practice with the scanty surplus that might be left of my capital. I placed
      this option before Louise timidly, for I could not bear the thought of forcing her
      inclinations. She seemed much moved by what she called my generosity: she consented; we were
      married. I was, as you may conceive, wholly ignorant of French law. We were married according
      to the English ceremony and the Protestant ritual. Shortly after our marriage we all three
      returned to Paris, taking an apartment in a quarter remote from that in which we had before
      lodged, in order to avoid any, harassment to which such small creditors as Duval had left
      behind him might subject us. I resumed my studies with redoubled energy, and Louise was
      necessarily left much alone with her poor father in the daytime. The defects in her character
      became more and more visible. She reproached me for the solitude to which I condemned her; our
      poverty galled her; she had no kind greeting for me when I returned at evening, wearied out.
      Before marriage she had not loved me; after marriage, alas! I fear she hated. We had been
      returned to Paris some months when poor Duval died; he had never recovered his faculties, nor
      had we ever learned from whom his pension had been received. Very soon after her father’s
      death I observed a singular change in the humour and manner of Louise. She was no longer
      peevish, irascible, reproachful; but taciturn and thoughtful. She seemed to me under the
      influence of some suppressed excitement, her cheeks flushed and her eye abstracted. At length,
      one evening when I returned I found her gone. She did not come back that night nor the next
      day. It was impossible for me to conjecture what had become of her. She had no friends, so far
      as I knew; no one had visited at our squalid apartment. The poor house in which we lodged had
      no concierge whom I could question; but the ground-floor was occupied by a small tobacconist’s
      shop, and the woman at the counter told me that for some days before my wife’s disappearance,
      she had observed her pass the shop-window in going out in the afternoon and returning towards
      the evening. Two terrible conjectures beset me either in her walk she had met some admirer,
      with whom she had fled; or, unable to bear the companionship and poverty of a union which she
      had begun to loathe, she had gone forth to drown herself in the Seine. On the third day from
      her flight I received the letter I enclose. Possibly the handwriting may serve you as a guide
      in the mission I intrust to you.

 MONSIEUR,—You have deceived me vilely,—taken advantage of my inexperienced youth and
      friendless position to decoy me into an illegal marriage. My only consolation under my
      calamity and disgrace is, that I am at least free from a detested bond. You will not see me
      again,—it is idle to attempt to do so. I have obtained refuge with relations whom I have been
      fortunate enough to discover, and to whom I intrust my fate; and even if you could learn the
      shelter I have sought, and have the audacity to molest me, you would but subject yourself to
      the chastisement you so richly deserve. Louise DUVAL. 
At the perusal of this cold-hearted, ungrateful letter, the love I had felt for this
      woman—already much shaken by her wayward and perverse temper—vanished from my heart, never to
      return. But as an honest man, my conscience was terribly stung. Could it be possible that I
      had unknowingly deceived her,—that our marriage was not legal? When I recovered from the stun
      which was the first effect of her letter, I sought the opinion of an avoue in the
      neighbourbood, named Sartiges, and to my dismay, I learned that while I, marrying according to
      the customs of my own country, was legally bound to Louise in England, and could not marry
      another, the marriage was in all ways illegal for her,—being without the consent of her
      relations while she was under age; without the ceremonials of the Roman Catholic Church,—to
      which, though I never heard any profession of religious belief from her or her father, it
      might fairly be presumed that she belonged; and, above all, without the form of civil contract
      which is indispensable to the legal marriage of a French subject.
The avoue said that the marriage, therefore, in itself was null, and that Louise could,
      without incurring legal penalties for bigamy, marry again in France according to the French
      laws; but that under the circumstances it was probable that her next of kin would apply on her
      behalf to the proper court for the formal annulment of the marriage, which would be the most
      effectual mode of saving her from any molestation on my part, and remove all possible
      questions hereafter as to her single state and absolute right to remarry. I had better remain
      quiet, and wait for intimation of further proceedings. I knew not what else to do, and
      necessarily submitted.
From this wretched listlessness of mind, alternated now by vehement resentment against
      Louise, now by the reproach of my own sense of honour in leaving that honour in so
      questionable a point of view, I was aroused by a letter from the distant kinsman by whom
      hitherto I had been so neglected. In the previous year he had lost one of his two children;
      the other was just dead. No nearer relation now surviving stood between me and my chance of
      inheritance from him. He wrote word of his domestic affliction with a manly sorrow which
      touched me, said that his health was failing, and begged me, as soon as possible, to come and
      visit him in Scotland. I went, and continued to reside with him till his death, some months
      afterwards. By his will I succeeded to his ample fortune on condition of taking his name.
As soon as the affairs connected with this inheritance permitted, I returned to Paris, and
      again saw M. Sartiges. I had never heard from Louise, nor from any one connected with her
      since the letter you have read. No steps had been taken to annul the marriage, and sufficient
      time had elapsed to render it improbable that such steps would be taken now; but if no such
      steps were taken, however free from the marriage-bond Louise might be, it clearly remained
      binding on myself.
At my request, M. Sartiges took the most vigorous measures that occurred to him to ascertain
      where Louise was, and what and who was the relation with whom she asserted she had found
      refuge. The police were employed; advertisements were issued, concealing names, but
      sufficiently clear to be intelligible to Louise if they came under her eye, and to the effect
      that if any informality in our marriage existed, she was implored for her own sake to remove
      it by a second ceremonial—answer to be addressed to the avoue. No answer came; the police had
      hitherto failed of discovering her, but were sanguine of success, when a few weeks after these
      advertisements a packet reached M. Sartiges, enclosing the certificates annexed to this
      letter, of the death of Louise Duval at Munich. The certificates, as you will see, are to
      appearance officially attested and unquestionably genuine. So they were considered by M.
      Sartiges as well as by myself. Here, then, all inquiry ceased; the police were dismissed. I
      was free. By little and little I overcame the painful impressions which my ill-starred union
      and the announcement of Louise’s early death bequeathed. Rich, and of active mind, I learned
      to dismiss the trials of my youth as a gloomy dream. I entered into public life; I made myself
      a creditable position; became acquainted with your aunt; we were wedded, and the beauty of her
      nature embellished mine. Alas, alas! two years after our marriage—nearly five years after I
      had received the certificates of Louise’s death—I and your aunt made a summer excursion into
      the country of the Rhine; on our return we rested at Aix-la-Chapelle. One day while there I
      was walking alone in the environs of the town, when, on the road, a little girl, seemingly
      about five years old, in chase of a butterfly, stumbled and fell just before my feet; I took
      her up, and as she was crying more from the shock of the fall than any actual hurt, I was
      still trying my best to comfort her, when a lady some paces behind her came up, and in taking
      the child from my arms as I was bending over her, thanked me in a voice that made my heart
      stand still. I looked up, and beheld Louise.
It was not till I had convulsively clasped her hand and uttered her name that she recognized
      me. I was, no doubt, the more altered of the two,—prosperity and happiness had left little
      trace of the needy, care worn, threadbare student. But if she were the last to recognize, she
      was the first to recover self-possession. The expression of her face became hard and set. I
      cannot pretend to repeat with any verbal accuracy the brief converse that took place between
      us, as she placed the child on the grass bank beside the path, bade her stay there quietly,
      and walked on with me some paces as if she did not wish the child to hear what was said.
The purport of what passed was to this effect: She refused to explain the certificates of
      her death further than that, becoming aware of what she called the “persecution” of the
      advertisements issued and inquiries instituted, she had caused those documents to be sent to
      the address given in the advertisement, in order to terminate all further molestation. But how
      they could have been obtained, or by what art so ingeniously forged as to deceive the
      acuteness of a practised lawyer, I know not to this day. She declared, indeed, that she was
      now happy, in easy circumstances, and that if I wished to make some reparation for the wrong I
      had done her, it would be to leave her in peace; and in case—which was not likely—we ever met
      again, to regard and treat her as a stranger; that she, on her part, never would molest me,
      and that the certified death of Louise Duval left me as free to marry again as she considered
      herself to be.
My mind was so confused, so bewildered, while she thus talked, that I did not attempt to
      interrupt her. The blow had so crushed me that I scarcely struggled under it; only, as she
      turned to leave me, I suddenly recollected that the child, when taken from my arms, had called
      her “Maman,” and, judging by the apparent age of the child, it must have been born but a few
      months after Louise had left me,—that it must be mine. And so, in my dreary woe, I faltered
      out, “But what of your infant? Surely that has on me a claim that you relinquish for yourself.
      You were not unfaithful to me while you deemed you were my wife?”
“Heavens! can you insult me by such a doubt? No!” she cried out, impulsively and haughtily.
      “But as I was not legally your wife, the child is not legally yours; it is mine, and only
      mine. Nevertheless, if you wish to claim it”—here she paused as in doubt. I saw at once that
      she was prepared to resign to me the child if I had urged her to do so. I must own, with a
      pang of remorse, that I recoiled from such a proposal. What could I do with the child? How
      explain to my wife the cause of my interest in it? If only a natural child of mine, I should
      have shrunk from owning to Janet a youthful error. But as it was,—the child by a former
      marriage, the former wife still living!—my blood ran cold with dread. And if I did take the
      child, invent what story I might as to its parentage, should I not expose myself, expose
      Janet, to terrible constant danger? The mother’s natural affection might urge her at any time
      to seek tidings of the child, and in so doing she might easily discover my new name, and,
      perhaps years hence, establish on me her own claim.
No, I could not risk such perils. I replied sullenly, “You say rightly; the child is
      yours,—only yours.” I was about to add an offer of pecuniary provision for it, but Louise had
      already turned scornfully towards the bank on which she had left the infant. I saw her snatch
      from the child’s hand some wild flowers the poor thing had been gathering; and how often have
      I thought of the rude way in which she did it,—not as a mother who loves her child. Just then
      other passengers appeared on the road; two of them I knew,—an English couple very intimate
      with Lady Janet and myself. They stopped to accost me, while Louise passed by with the infant
      towards the town. I turned in the opposite direction, and strove to collect my thoughts.
      Terrible as was the discovery thus suddenly made, it was evident that Louise had as strong an
      interest as myself to conceal it. There was little chance that it would ever be divulged. Her
      dress and that of the child were those of persons in the richer classes of life. After all,
      doubtless, the child needed not pecuniary assistance from me, and was surely best off under
      the mother’s care. Thus I sought to comfort and to delude myself.
The next day Janet and I left Aix-la-Chapelle and returned to England. But it was impossible
      for me to banish the dreadful thought that Janet was not legally my wife; that could she even
      guess the secret lodged in my breast she would be lost to me forever, even though she died of
      the separation (you know well how tenderly she loved me). My nature underwent a silent
      revolution. I had previously cherished the ambition common to most men in public life,—the
      ambition for fame, for place, for power. That ambition left me; I shrank from the thought of
      becoming too well known, lest Louise or her connections, as yet ignorant of my new name, might
      more easily learn what the world knew; namely that I had previously borne another name,—the
      name of her husband,—and finding me wealthy and honoured, might hereafter be tempted to claim
      for herself or her daughter the ties she adjured for both while she deemed me poor and
      despised. But partly my conscience, partly the influence of the angel by my side, compelled me
      to seek whatever means of doing good to others position and circumstances placed at my
      disposal. I was alarmed when even such quiet exercise of mind and fortune acquired a sort of
      celebrity. How pain fully I shrank from it! The world attributed my dread of publicity to
      unaffected modesty. The world praised me, and I knew myself an impostor. But the years stole
      on. I heard no more of Louise or her child, and my fears gradually subsided. Yet I was
      consoled when the two children born to me by Janet died in their infancy. Had they lived, who
      can tell whether something might not have transpired to prove them illegitimate.
I must hasten on. At last came the great and crushing calamity of my life,—I lost the woman
      who was my all in all. At least she was spared the discovery that would have deprived me of
      the right of tending her deathbed, and leaving within her tomb a place vacant for myself.
But after the first agonies that followed her loss, the conscience I had so long sought to
      tranquillize became terribly reproachful. Louise had forfeited all right to my consideration,
      but my guiltless child had not done so. Did it live still? If so, was it not the heir to my
      fortunes,—the only child left to me? True, I have the absolute right to dispose of my wealth:
      it is not in land; it is not entailed: but was not the daughter I had forsaken morally the
      first claimant; was no reparation due to her? You remember that my physician ordered me, some
      little time after your aunt’s death, to seek a temporary change of scene. I obeyed, and went
      away no one knew whither. Well, I repaired to Paris; there I sought M. Sartiges, the avoue. I
      found he had been long dead. I discovered his executors, and inquired if any papers or
      correspondence between Richard Macdonald and himself many years ago were in existence. All
      such documents, with others not returned to correspondents at his decease, had been burned by
      his desire. No possible clew to the whereabouts of Louise, should any have been gained since I
      last saw her, was left. What then to do I knew not. I did not dare to make inquiries through
      strangers, which, if discovering my child, might also bring to light a marriage that would
      have dishonoured the memory of my lost saint. I returned to England, feeling that my days were
      numbered. It is to you that I transmit the task of those researches which I could not
      institute. I bequeath to you, with the exception of trifling legacies and donations to public
      charities, the whole of my fortune; but you will understand by this letter that it is to be
      held on a trust which I cannot specify in my will. I could not, without dishonouring the
      venerated name of your aunt, indicate as the heiress of my wealth a child by a wife living at
      the time I married Janet. I cannot form any words for such a devise which would not arouse
      gossip and suspicion, and furnish ultimately a clew to the discovery I would shun. I calculate
      that, after all deductions, the sum that will devolve to you will be about L220,000. That
      which I mean to be absolutely and at once yours is the comparatively trifling legacy of
      L20,000. If Louise’s child be not living, or if you find full reason to suppose that despite
      appearances the child is not mine, the whole of my fortune lapses to you; but should Louise be
      surviving and need pecuniary aid, you will contrive that she may have such an annuity as you
      may deem fitting, without learning whence it come. You perceive that it is your object, if
      possible, even more than mine, to preserve free from slur the name and memory of her who was
      to you a second mother. All ends we desire would be accomplished could you, on discovering my
      lost child, feel that, without constraining your inclinations, you could make her your wife.
      She would then naturally share with you my fortune, and all claims of justice and duty would
      be quietly appeased. She would now be of age suitable to yours. When I saw her at Aix she gave
      promise of inheriting no small share of her mother’s beauty. If Louise’s assurance of her easy
      circumstances were true, her daughter has possibly been educated and reared with tenderness
      and care. You have already assured me that you have no prior attachment. But if, on
      discovering this child, you find her already married, or one whom you could not love nor
      esteem, I leave it implicitly to your honour and judgment to determine what share of the
      L200,000 left in your hands should be consigned to her. She may have been corrupted by her
      mother’s principles. She may—Heaven forbid!—have fallen into evil courses, and wealth would be
      misspent in her hands. In that case a competence sufficing to save her from further
      degradation, from the temptations of poverty, would be all that I desire you to devote from my
      wealth. On the contrary, you may find in her one who, in all respects, ought to be my chief
      inheritor. All this I leave in full confidence to you, as being, of all the men I know, the
      one who unites the highest sense of honour with the largest share of practical sense and
      knowledge of life. The main difficulty, whatever this lost girl may derive from my substance,
      will be in devising some means to convey it to her so that neither she nor those around her
      may trace the bequest to me. She can never be acknowledged as my child,—never! Your reverence
      for the beloved dead forbids that. This difficulty your clear strong sense must overcome; mine
      is blinded by the shades of death. You too will deliberately consider how to institute the
      inquiries after mother and child so as not to betray our secret. This will require great
      caution. You will probably commence at Paris, through the agency of the police, to whom you
      will be very guarded in your communications. It is most unfortunate that I have no miniature
      of Louise, and that any description of her must be so vague that it may not serve to discover
      her; but such as it is, it may prevent your mistaking for her some other of her name. Louise
      was above the common height, and looked taller than she was, with the peculiar combination of
      very dark hair, very fair complexion, and light-gray eyes. She would now be somewhat under the
      age of forty. She was not without accomplishments, derived from the companionship with her
      father. She spoke English fluently; she drew with taste, and even with talent. You will see
      the prudence of confining research at first to Louise, rather than to the child who is the
      principal object of it; for it is not till you can ascertain what has become of her that you
      can trust the accuracy of any information respecting the daughter, whom I assume, perhaps
      after all erroneously, to be mine. Though Louise talked with such levity of holding herself
      free to marry, the birth of her child might be sufficient injury to her reputation to become a
      serious obstacle to such second nuptials, not having taken formal steps to annul her marriage
      with myself. If not thus remarried, there would be no reason why she should not resume her
      maiden name of Duval, as she did in the signature of her letter to me: finding that I had
      ceased to molest her by the inquiries, to elude which she had invented the false statement of
      her death. It seems probable, therefore, that she is residing somewhere in Paris, and in the
      name of Duval. Of course the burden of uncertainty as to your future cannot be left to oppress
      you for an indefinite length of time. If at the end, say, of two years, your researches have
      wholly failed, consider three-fourths of my whole fortune to have passed to you, and put by
      the fourth to accumulate, should the child afterwards be discovered, and satisfy your judgment
      as to her claims on me as her father. Should she not, it will be a reserve fund for your own
      children. But oh, if my child could be found in time! and oh, if she be all that could win
      your heart, and be the wife you would select from free choice! I can say no more. Pity me, and
      judge leniently of Janet’s husband.

 R. K. 
The key to Graham’s conduct is now given,—the deep sorrow that took him to the tomb of the
      aunt he so revered, and whose honoured memory was subjected to so great a risk; the slightness
      of change in his expenditure and mode of life, after an inheritance supposed to be so ample;
      the abnegation of his political ambition; the subject of his inquiries, and the cautious
      reserve imposed upon them; above all, the position towards Isaura in which he was so cruelly
      placed.
Certainly, his first thought in revolving the conditions of his trust had been that of
      marriage with this lost child of Richard King’s, should she be discovered single, disengaged,
      and not repulsive to his inclinations. Tacitly he subscribed to the reasons for this course
      alleged by the deceased. It was the simplest and readiest plan of uniting justice to the
      rightful inheritor with care for a secret so important to the honour of his aunt, of Richard
      King himself,—his benefactor,—of the illustrious house from which Lady Janet had sprung.
      Perhaps, too, the consideration that by this course a fortune so useful to his career was
      secured was not without influence on the mind of a man naturally ambitious. But on that
      consideration he forbade himself to dwell. He put it away from him as a sin. Yet, to marriage
      with any one else, until his mission was fulfilled, and the uncertainty as to the extent of
      his fortune was dispelled, there interposed grave practical obstacles. How could he honestly
      present himself to a girl and to her parents in the light of a rich man, when in reality he
      might be but a poor man? How could he refer to any lawyer the conditions which rendered
      impossible any settlement that touched a shilling of the large sum which at any day he might
      have to transfer to another? Still, when once fully conspicuous how deep was the love with
      which Isaura had inspired him, the idea of wedlock with the daughter of Richard King, if she
      yet lived and was single, became inadmissible. The orphan condition of the young Italian
      smoothed away the obstacles to proposals of marriage which would have embarrassed his
      addresses to girls of his own rank, and with parents who would have demanded settlements. And
      if he had found Isaura alone on that day on which he had seen her last, he would doubtless
      have yielded to the voice of his heart, avowed his love, wooed her own, and committed both to
      the tie of betrothal. We have seen how rudely such yearnings of his heart were repelled on
      that last interview. His English prejudices were so deeply rooted, that, even if he had been
      wholly free from the trust bequeathed to him, he would have recoiled from marriage with a girl
      who, in the ardour for notoriety, could link herself with such associates as Gustave Rameau,
      by habits a Bohemian, and by principles a Socialist.
In flying from Paris, he embraced the resolve to banish all thought of wedding Isaura, and
      to devote himself sternly to the task which had so sacred a claim upon him. Not that he could
      endure the idea of marrying another, even if the lost heiress should be all that his heart
      could have worshipped, had that heart been his own to give; but he was impatient of the burden
      heaped on him,—of the fortune which might not be his, of the uncertainty which paralyzed all
      his ambitious schemes for the future.
Yet, strive as he would—and no man could strive more resolutely—he could not succeed in
      banishing the image of Isaura. It was with him always; and with it a sense of irreparable
      loss, of a terrible void, of a pining anguish.
And the success of his inquiries at Aix-la-Chapelle, while sufficient to detain him in the
      place, was so slight, and advanced by such slow degrees, that it furnished no continued
      occupation to his restless mind. M. Renard was acute and painstaking. But it was no easy
      matter to obtain any trace of a Parisian visitor to so popular a Spa so many years ago. The
      name Duval, too, was so common, that at Aix, as we have seen at Paris, time was wasted in the
      chase of a Duval who proved not to be the lost Louise. At last M. Renard chanced on a house in
      which, in the year 1849, two ladies from Paris had lodged for three weeks. One was named
      Madame Duval, the other Madame Marigny. They were both young, both very handsome, and much of
      the same height and colouring. But Madame Marigny was the handsomer of the two. Madame Duval
      frequented the gaming-tables and was apparently of very lively temper. Madame Marigny lived
      very quietly, rarely or never stirred out, and seemed in delicate health. She, however,
      quitted the apartment somewhat abruptly, and, to the best of the lodging-house-keeper’s
      recollection, took rooms in the country near Aix—she could not remember where. About two
      months after the departure of Madame Marigny, Madame Duval also left Aix, and in company with
      a French gentleman who had visited her much of late,—a handsome man of striking appearance.
      The lodging house-keeper did not know what or who he was. She remembered that he used to be
      announced to Madame Duval by the name of M. Achille. Madame Duval had never been seen again by
      the lodging-house-keeper after she had left. But Madame Marigny she had once seen, nearly five
      years after she had quitted the lodgings,—seen her by chance at the railway station,
      recognized her at once, and accosted her, offering her the old apartment. Madame Marigny had,
      however, briefly replied that she was only at Aix for a few hours, and should quit it the same
      day.
The inquiry now turned towards Madame Marigny. The date on which the lodging-house-keeper
      had last seen her coincided with the year in which Richard King had met Louise. Possibly,
      therefore, she might have accompanied the latter to Aix at that time, and could, if found,
      give information as to her subsequent history and present whereabouts.
After a tedious search throughout all the environs of Aix, Graham himself came, by the
      merest accident, upon the vestiges of Louise’s friend. He had been wandering alone in the
      country round Aix, when a violent thunderstorm drove him to ask shelter in the house of a
      small farmer, situated in a field, a little off the byway which he had taken. While waiting
      for the cessation of the storm, and drying his clothes by the fire in a room that adjoined the
      kitchen, he entered into conversation with the farmer’s wife, a pleasant, well-mannered
      person, and made some complimentary observation on a small sketch of the house in
      water-colours that hung upon the wall. “Ah,” said the farmer’s wife, “that was done by a
      French lady who lodged here many years ago. She drew very prettily, poor thing.”
“A lady who lodged here many years ago,—how many?”
“Well, I guess somewhere about twenty.”
“Ah, indeed! Was it a Madame Marigny?”
“Bon Dieu! That was indeed her name. Did you know her? I should be so glad to hear she is
      well and—I hope—happy.”
“I do not know where she is now, and am making inquiries to ascertain. Pray help me. How
      long did Madame Marigny lodge with you?”
“I think pretty well two months; yes, two months. She left a month after her
      confinement.”
“She was confined here?”
“Yes. When she first came, I had no idea that she was enceinte. She had a pretty figure, and
      no one would have guessed it, in the way she wore her shawl. Indeed I only began to suspect it
      a few days before it happened; and that was so suddenly, that all was happily over before we
      could send for the accoucheur.”
“And the child lived?—a girl or a boy?”
“A girl,—the prettiest baby.”
“Did she take the child with her when she went?”
“No; it was put out to nurse with a niece of my husband who was confined about the same
      time. Madame paid liberally in advance, and continued to send money half-yearly, till she came
      herself and took away the little girl.”
“When was that,—a little less than five years after she had left it?”
“Why, you know all about it, Monsieur; yes, not quite five years after. She did not come to
      see me, which I thought unkind, but she sent me, through my niece-in-law, a real gold watch
      and a shawl. Poor dear lady—for lady she was all over,—with proud ways, and would not bear to
      be questioned. But I am sure she was none of your French light ones, but an honest wife like
      myself, though she never said so.”
“And have you no idea where she was all the five years she was away, or where she went after
      reclaiming her child?”
“No, indeed, Monsieur.”
“But her remittances for the infant must have been made by letters, and the letters would
      have had post-marks?”
“Well, I dare say; I am no scholar myself. But suppose you see Marie Hubert, that is my
      niece-in-law, perhaps she has kept the envelopes.”
“Where does Madame Hubert live?”
“It is just a league off by the short path; you can’t miss the way. Her husband has a bit of
      land of his own, but he is also a carrier—‘Max Hubert, carrier,’—written over the door, just
      opposite the first church you get to. The rain has ceased, but it may be too far for you
      to-day.”
“Not a bit of it. Many thanks.”
“But if you find out the dear lady and see her, do tell her how pleased I should be to hear
      good news of her and the little one.”
Graham strode on under the clearing skies to the house indicated. He found Madame Hubert at
      home, and ready to answer all questions; but, alas! she had not the envelopes. Madame Marigny,
      on removing the child, had asked for all the envelopes or letters, and carried them away with
      her. Madame Hubert, who was as little of a scholar as her aunt-in-law was, had never paid much
      attention to the post-marks on the envelopes; and the only one that she did remember was the
      first, that contained a bank-note, and that post-mark was “Vienna.”
“But did not Madame Marigny’s letters ever give you an address to which to write with news
      of her child?”
“I don’t think she cared much for her child, Monsieur. She kissed it very coldly when she
      came to take it away. I told the poor infant that that was her own mamma; and Madame said,
      ‘Yes, you may call me maman,’ in a tone of voice—well, not at all like that of a mother. She
      brought with her a little bag which contained some fine clothes for the child, and was very
      impatient till the child had got them on.”
“Are you quite sure it was the same lady who left the child?”
“Oh, there is no doubt of that. She was certainly tres belle, but I did not fancy her as
      aunt did. She carried her head very high, and looked rather scornful. However, I must say she
      behaved very generously.”
“Still you have not answered my question whether her letters contained no address.”
“She never wrote more than two letters. One enclosing the first remittance was but a few
      lines, saying that if the child was well and thriving, I need not write; but if it died or
      became dangerously ill, I might at any time write a line to Madame ——-, Poste Restante,
      Vienna. She was travelling about, but the letter would be sure to reach her sooner or later.
      The only other letter I had was to apprise me that she was coming to remove the child, and
      might be expected in three days after the receipt of her letter.”
“And all the other communications from her were merely remittances in blank envelopes?”
“Exactly so.”
Graham, finding he could learn no more, took his departure. On his way home, meditating the
      new idea that his adventure that day suggested, he resolved to proceed at once, accompanied by
      M. Renard, to Munich, and there learn what particulars could be yet ascertained respecting
      those certificates of the death of Louise Duval, to which (sharing Richard King’s very natural
      belief that they had been skilfully forged) he had hitherto attached no importance.
