
CHAPTER XIV.
Unprescient of the perils that awaited him, absorbed in the sense of existing discomfort,
      cold, and hunger, Fox lifted his mournful visage from his master’s dressing-gown, in which he
      had encoiled his shivering frame, on the entrance of De Breze and the concierge of the house
      in which Lemercier had his apartment. Recognising the Vicomte as one of his master’s
      acquaintances, he checked the first impulse that prompted him to essay a feeble bark, and
      permitted himself, with a petulant whine, to be extracted from his covering, and held in the
      arms of the murderous visitor.
“Dieu des dieux!” ejaculated De Breze, “how light the poor beast has become!” Here he
      pinched the sides and thighs of the victim. “Still,” he said, “there is some flesh yet on
      these bones. You may grill the paws, fricassee the shoulders, and roast the rest. The rognons
      and the head accept for yourself as a perquisite.” Here he transferred Fox to the arms of the
      concierge, adding, “Vite au besogne, mon ami.”
“Yes, Monsieur. I must be quick about it while my wife is absent. She has a faiblesse for
      the brute. He must be on the spit before she returns.”
“Be it so; and on the table in an hour—five o’clock precisely—I am famished.”
The concierge disappeared with Fox. De Breze then amused himself by searching into
      Frederic’s cupboards and buffets, from which he produced a cloth and utensils necessary for
      the repast. These he arranged with great neatness, and awaited in patience the moment of
      participation in the feast.
The hour of five had struck before Savarin and Frederio entered the salon; and at their
      sight De Breze dashed to the staircase and called out to the concierge to serve the
      dinner.
Frederic, though unconscious of the Thyestean nature of the banquet, still looked round for
      the dog; and, not perceiving him, began to call out, “Fox! Fox! where hast thou hidden
      thyself?”
“Tranquillise yourself,” said De Breze. “Do not suppose that I have not....”
NOTE BY THE AUTHOR’S SON.—[See also Prefatory Note]—The hand that wrote thus far has left
      unwritten the last scene of the tragedy of poor Fox. In the deep where Prospero has dropped
      his wand are now irrevocably buried the humour and the pathos of this cynophagous banquet. One
      detail of it, however, which the author imparted to his son, may here be faintly indicated.
      Let the sympathising reader recognise all that is dramatic in the conflict between hunger and
      affection; let him recall to mind the lachrymose loving-kindness of his own post-prandial
      emotions after blissfully breaking some fast, less mercilessly prolonged, we will hope, than
      that of these besieged banqueters, and then, though unaided by the fancy which conceived so
      quaint a situation, he may perhaps imagine what tearful tenderness would fill the eyes of the
      kind-hearted Frederic, as they contemplate the well-picked bones of his sacrificed favourite
      on the plate before him; which he pushes away, sighing, “Ah, poor Fox! how he would have
      enjoyed those bones!”
The chapter immediately following this one also remains unfinished. It was not intended to
      close the narrative thus left uncompleted; but of those many and so various works which have
      not unworthily associated with almost every department of literature the name of a single
      English writer, it is CHAPTER THE LAST. Had the author lived to finish it, he would doubtless
      have added to his Iliad of the Siege of Paris its most epic episode, by here describing the
      mighty combat between those two princes of the Parisian Bourse, the magnanimous Duplessis and
      the redoubtable Louvier. Amongst the few other pages of the book which have been left
      unwritten, we must also reckon with regret some pages descriptive of the reconciliation
      between Graham Vane and Isaura Cicogna; but, fortunately for the satisfaction of every reader
      who may have followed thus far the fortunes of Die Parisians, all that our curiosity is
      chiefly interested to learn has been recorded in the Envoi, which was written before the
      completion of the novel.
We know not, indeed, what has become of these two Parisian types of a Beauty not of
      Holiness, the poor vain Poet of the Pave, and the good-hearted Ondine of the Gutter. It is
      obvious, from the absence of all allusion to them in Lemercier’s letter to Vane, that they had
      passed out of the narrative before that letter was written. We must suppose the catastrophe of
      their fates to have been described, in some preceding chapter, by the author himself; who
      would assuredly not have left 141. Gustave Rameau in permanent pos session of his ill-merited
      and ill-ministered fortune. That French representative of the appropriately popular poetry of
      modern ideas, which prefers “the roses and raptures of vice” to “the lilies and languors of
      virtue,” cannot have been irredeemably reconciled by the sweet savours of the domestic pot-au
      jeu, even when spiced with pungent whiffs of repudiated disreputability, to any selfish
      betrayal of the cause of universal social emancipation from the personal proprieties. If poor
      Julie Caumartin has perished in the siege of Paris, with all the grace of a self-wrought
      redemption still upon her, we shall doubtless deem her fate a happier one than any she could
      have found in prolonged existence as Madame Rameau; and a certain modicum of this world’s good
      things will, in that case, have been rescued for worthier employment by Graham Vane. To that
      assurance nothing but Lemercier’s description of the fate of Victor de Mauleon (which will be
      found in the Envoi) need be added for the satisfaction of our sense of poetic justice and if
      on the mimic stage, from which they now disappear, all these puppets have rightly played their
      parts in the drama of an empire’s fall, each will have helped to “point a moral” as well as to
      “adorn a tale.” Valete et plaudite!
