
CHAPTER I.
It is several weeks after the date of the last chapter; the lime-trees in the Tuileries are
      clothed in green.
In a somewhat spacious apartment on the ground-floor in the quiet locality of the Rue
      d’Anjou, a man was seated, very still and evidently absorbed in deep thought, before a
      writing-table placed close to the window.
Seen thus, there was an expression of great power both of intellect and of character in a
      face which, in ordinary social commune, might rather be noticeable for an aspect of hardy
      frankness, suiting well with the clear-cut, handsome profile, and the rich dark auburn hair,
      waving carelessly over one of those broad open foreheads, which, according to an old writer,
      seem the “frontispiece of a temple dedicated to Honour.”
The forehead, indeed, was the man’s most remarkable feature. It could not but prepossess the
      beholder. When, in private theatricals, he had need to alter the character of his countenance,
      he did it effectually, merely by forcing down his hair till it reached his eyebrows. He no
      longer then looked like the same man.
The person I describe has been already introduced to the reader as Graham Vane. But perhaps
      this is the fit occasion to enter into some such details as to his parentage and position as
      may make the introduction more satisfactory and complete.
His father, the representative of a very ancient family, came into possession, after a long
      minority, of what may be called a fair squire’s estate, and about half a million in moneyed
      investments, inherited on the female side. Both land and money were absolutely at his
      disposal, unencumbered by entail or settlement. He was a man of a brilliant, irregular genius,
      of princely generosity, of splendid taste, of a gorgeous kind of pride closely allied to a
      masculine kind of vanity. As soon as he was of age he began to build, converting his squire’s
      hall into a ducal palace. He then stood for the county; and in days before the first Reform
      Bill, when a county election was to the estate of a candidate what a long war is to the debt
      of a nation. He won the election; he obtained early successes in Parliament. It was said by
      good authorities in political circles that, if he chose, he might aspire to lead his party,
      and ultimately to hold the first rank in the government of his country.
That may or may not be true; but certainly he did not choose to take the trouble necessary
      for such an ambition. He was too fond of pleasure, of luxury, of pomp. He kept a famous stud
      of racers and hunters. He was a munificent patron of art. His establishments, his
      entertainments, were on a par with those of the great noble who represented the loftiest (Mr.
      Vane would not own it to be the eldest) branch of his genealogical tree.
He became indifferent to political contests, indolent in his attendance at the House,
      speaking seldom, not at great length nor with much preparation, but with power and fire,
      originality and genius; so that he was not only effective as an orator, but combining with
      eloquence advantages of birth, person, station, the reputation of patriotic independence, and
      genial attributes of character, he was an authority of weight in the scales of party.
This gentleman, at the age of forty, married the dowerless daughter of a poor but
      distinguished naval officer, of noble family, first cousin to the Duke of Alton.
He settled on her a suitable jointure, but declined to tie up any portion of his property
      for the benefit of children by the marriage. He declared that so much of his fortune was
      invested either in mines, the produce of which was extremely fluctuating, or in various funds,
      over rapid transfers in which it was his amusement and his interest to have control, unchecked
      by reference to trustees, that entails and settlements on children were an inconvenience he
      declined to incur.
Besides, he held notions of his own as to the wisdom of keeping children dependent on their
      father. “What numbers of young men,” said he, “are ruined in character and in fortune by
      knowing that when their father dies they are certain of the same provision, no matter how they
      displease him; and in the meanwhile forestalling that provision by recourse to usurers.” These
      arguments might not have prevailed over the bride’s father a year or two later, when, by the
      death of intervening kinsmen, he became Duke of Alton; but in his then circumstances the
      marriage itself was so much beyond the expectations which the portionless daughter of a
      sea-captain has the right to form that Mr. Vane had it all his own way, and he remained
      absolute master of his whole fortune, save of that part of his landed estate on which his
      wife’s jointure was settled; and even from this incumbrance he was very soon freed. His wife
      died in the second year of marriage, leaving an only son,—Graham. He grieved for her loss with
      all the passion of an impressionable, ardent, and powerful nature. Then for a while he sought
      distraction to his sorrow by throwing himself into public life with a devoted energy he had
      not previously displayed.
His speeches served to bring his party into power, and he yielded, though reluctantly, to
      the unanimous demand of that party that he should accept one of the highest offices in the new
      Cabinet. He acquitted himself well as an administrator, but declared, no doubt honestly, that
      he felt like Sinbad released from the old man on his back, when, a year or two afterwards, he
      went out of office with his party. No persuasions could induce him to come in again; nor did
      he ever again take a very active part in debate. “No,” said he, “I was born to the freedom of
      a private gentleman: intolerable to me is the thraldom of a public servant. But I will bring
      up my son so that he may acquit the debt which I decline to pay to my country.” There he kept
      his word. Graham had been carefully educated for public life, the ambition for it dinned into
      his ear from childhood. In his school vacations his father made him learn and declaim chosen
      specimens of masculine oratory; engaged an eminent actor to give him lessons in elocution;
      bade him frequent theatres, and study there the effect which words derive from looks and
      gesture; encouraged him to take part himself in private theatricals. To all this the boy lent
      his mind with delight. He had the orator’s inborn temperament; quick, yet imaginative, and
      loving the sport of rivalry and contest. Being also, in his boyish years, good-humoured and
      joyous, he was not more a favourite with the masters in the schoolroom than with the boys in
      the play-ground. Leaving Eton at seventeen, he then entered at Cambridge, and became, in his
      first term, the most popular speaker at the Union.
But his father cut short his academical career, and decided, for reasons of his own, to
      place him at once in diplomacy. He was attached to the Embassy at Paris, and partook of the
      pleasures and dissipations of that metropolis too keenly to retain much of the sterner
      ambition to which he had before devoted himself. Becoming one of the spoiled darlings of
      fashion, there was great danger that his character would relax into the easy grace of the
      Epicurean, when all such loiterings in the Rose Garden were brought to abrupt close by a rude
      and terrible change in his fortunes.
His father was killed by a fall from his horse in hunting; and when his affairs were
      investigated, they were found to be hopelessly involved: apparently the assets would not
      suffice for the debts. The elder Vane himself was probably not aware of the extent of his
      liabilities. He had never wanted ready money to the last. He could always obtain that from a
      money-lender, or from the sale of his funded investments. But it became obvious, on examining
      his papers, that he knew at least how impaired would be the heritage he should bequeath to a
      son whom he idolized. For that reason he had given Graham a profession in diplomacy, and for
      that reason he had privately applied to the Ministry for the Viceroyalty of India, in the
      event of its speedy vacancy. He was eminent enough not to anticipate refusal, and with economy
      in that lucrative post much of his pecuniary difficulties might have been redeemed, and at
      least an independent provision secured for his son.
Graham, like Alain de Rochebriant, allowed no reproach on his father’s memory; indeed, with
      more reason than Alain, for the elder Vane’s fortune had at least gone on no mean and
      frivolous dissipation.
It had lavished itself on encouragement to art, on great objects of public beneficence, on
      public-spirited aid of political objects; and even in more selfish enjoyments there was a
      certain grandeur in his princely hospitalities, in his munificent generosity, in a
      warm-hearted carelessness for money. No indulgence in petty follies or degrading vices
      aggravated the offence of the magnificent squanderer.
“Let me look on my loss of fortune as a gain to myself,” said Graham, manfully. “Had I been
      a rich man, my experience of Paris tells me that I should most likely have been a very idle
      one. Now that I have no gold, I must dig in myself for iron.”
The man to whom he said this was an uncle-in-law,—if I may use that phrase,—the Right Hon.
      Richard King, popularly styled “the blameless King.”
This gentleman had married the sister of Graham’s mother, whose loss in his infancy and
      boyhood she had tenderly and anxiously sought to supply. It is impossible to conceive a woman
      more fitted to invite love and reverence than was Lady Janet King, her manners were so sweet
      and gentle, her whole nature so elevated and pure.
Her father had succeeded to the dukedom when she married Mr. King, and the alliance was not
      deemed quite suitable. Still it was not one to which the Duke would have been fairly justified
      in refusing his assent.
Mr. King could not indeed boast of noble ancestry, nor was even a landed proprietor; but he
      was a not-undistinguished member of Parliament, of irreproachable character, and ample fortune
      inherited from a distant kinsman, who had enriched himself as a merchant. It was on both sides
      a marriage of love.
It is popularly said that a man uplifts a wife to his own rank: it as often happens that a
      woman uplifts her husband to the dignity of her own character. Richard King rose greatly in
      public estimation after his marriage with Lady Janet.
She united to a sincere piety a very active and a very enlightened benevolence. She guided
      his ambition aside from mere party politics into subjects of social and religious interest,
      and in devoting himself to these he achieved a position more popular and more respected than
      he could ever have won in the strife of party.
When the Government of which the elder Vane became a leading Minister was formed, it was
      considered a great object to secure a name as high in the religious world, so beloved by the
      working classes, as that of Richard King; and he accepted one of those places which, though
      not in the cabinet, confers the rank of Privy Councillor.
When that brief-lived Administration ceased, he felt the same sensation of relief that Vane
      had felt, and came to the same resolution never again to accept office, but from different
      reasons, all of which need not now be detailed. Amongst them, however, certainly this: he was
      exceedingly sensitive to opinion, thin-skinned as to abuse, and very tenacious of the respect
      due to his peculiar character of sanctity and philanthropy. He writhed under every newspaper
      article that had made “the blameless King” responsible for the iniquities of the Government to
      which he belonged. In the loss of office he seemed to recover his former throne.
Mr. King heard Graham’s resolution with a grave approving smile, and his interest in the
      young man became greatly increased. He devoted himself strenuously to the object of saving to
      Graham some wrecks of his paternal fortunes, and having a clear head and great experience in
      the transaction of business, he succeeded beyond the most sanguine expectations formed by the
      family solicitor. A rich manufacturer was found to purchase at a fancy price the bulk of the
      estate with the palatial mansion, which the estate alone could never have sufficed to maintain
      with suitable establishments.
So that when all debts were paid, Graham found himself in possession of a clear income of
      about L500 a year, invested in a mortgage secured on a part of the hereditary lands, on which
      was seated an old hunting-lodge bought by a brewer.
With this portion of the property Graham parted very reluctantly. It was situated amid the
      most picturesque scenery on the estate, and the lodge itself was a remnant of the original
      residence of his ancestors before it had been abandoned for that which, built in the reign of
      Elizabeth, had been expanded into a Trenthain-like palace by the last owner.
But Mr. King’s argument reconciled him to the sacrifice. “I can manage,” said the prudent
      adviser, “if you insist on it, to retain that remnant of the hereditary estate which you are
      so loath to part with. But how? by mortgaging it to an extent that will scarcely leave you
      L50. a year net from the rents. This is not all. Your mind will then be distracted from the
      large object of a career to the small object of retaining a few family acres; you will be
      constantly hampered by private anxieties and fears; you could do nothing for the benefit of
      those around you,—could not repair a farmhouse for a better class of tenant, could not rebuild
      a labourer’s dilapidated cottage. Give up an idea that might be very well for a man whose sole
      ambition was to remain a squire, however beggarly. Launch yourself into the larger world of
      metropolitan life with energies wholly unshackled, a mind wholly undisturbed, and secure of an
      income which, however modest, is equal to that of most young men who enter that world as your
      equals.”
Graham was convinced, and yielded, though with a bitter pang. It is hard for a man whose
      fathers have lived on the soil to give up all trace of their whereabouts. But none saw in him
      any morbid consciousness of change of fortune, when, a year after his father’s death, he
      reassumed his place in society. If before courted for his expectations, he was still courted
      for himself; by many of the great who had loved his father, perhaps even courted more.
He resigned the diplomatic career, not merely because the rise in that profession is slow,
      and in the intermediate steps the chances of distinction are slight and few, but more because
      he desired to cast his lot in the home country, and regarded the courts of other lands as
      exile.
It was not true, however, as Lemercier had stated on report, that he lived on his pen.
      Curbing all his old extravagant tastes, L500 a year amply supplied his wants. But he had by
      his pen gained distinction, and created great belief in his abilities for a public career. He
      had written critical articles, read with much praise, in periodicals of authority, and had
      published one or two essays on political questions which had created yet more sensation. It
      was only the graver literature, connected more or less with his ultimate object of a public
      career, in which he had thus evinced his talents of composition. Such writings were not of a
      nature to bring him much money, but they gave him a definite and solid station. In the old
      time, before the first Reform Bill, his reputation would have secured him at once a seat in
      Parliament; but the ancient nurseries of statesmen are gone, and their place is not
      supplied.
He had been invited, however, to stand for more than one large and populous borough, with
      very fair prospects of success; and, whatever the expense, Mr. King had offered to defray it.
      But Graham would not have incurred the latter obligation; and when he learned the pledges
      which his supporters would have exacted, he would not have stood if success had been certain
      and the cost nothing. “I cannot,” he said to his friends, “go into the consideration of what
      is best for the country with my thoughts manacled; and I cannot be both representative and
      slave of the greatest ignorance of the greatest number. I bide my time, and meanwhile I prefer
      to write as I please, rather than vote as I don’t please.”
Three years went by, passed chiefly in England, partly in travel; and at the age of thirty,
      Graham Vane was still one of those of whom admirers say, “He will be a great man some day;”
      and detractors reply, “Some day seems a long way off.”
The same fastidiousness which had operated against that entrance into Parliament, to which
      his ambition not the less steadily adapted itself, had kept him free from the perils of
      wedlock. In his heart he yearned for love and domestic life, but he had hitherto met with no
      one who realized the ideal he had formed. With his person, his accomplishments, his
      connections, and his repute, he might have made many an advantageous marriage. But somehow or
      other the charm vanished from a fair face, if the shadow of a money-bag fell on it; on the
      other hand, his ambition occupied so large a share in his thoughts that he would have fled in
      time from the temptation of a marriage that would have overweighted him beyond the chance of
      rising. Added to all, he desired in a wife an intellect that, if not equal to his own, could
      become so by sympathy,—a union of high culture and noble aspiration, and yet of loving womanly
      sweetness which a man seldom finds out of books; and when he does find it, perhaps it does not
      wear the sort of face that he fancies. Be that as it may, Graham was still unmarried and
      heart-whole.
And now a new change in his life befell him. Lady Janet died of a fever contracted in her
      habitual rounds of charity among the houses of the poor. She had been to him as the most
      tender mother, and a lovelier soul than hers never alighted on the earth. His grief was
      intense; but what was her husband’s?—one of those griefs that kill.
To the side of Richard King his Janet had been as the guardian angel. His love for her was
      almost worship: with her, every object in a life hitherto so active and useful seemed gone. He
      evinced no noisy passion of sorrow. He shut himself up, and refused to see even Graham. But
      after some weeks had passed, he admitted the clergyman in whom on spiritual matters he
      habitually confided, and seemed consoled by the visits; then he sent for his lawyer and made
      his will; after which he allowed Graham to call on him daily, on the condition that there
      should be no reference to his loss. He spoke to the young man on other subjects, rather
      drawing him out about himself, sounding his opinion on various grave matters, watching his
      face while he questioned, as if seeking to dive into his heart, and sometimes pathetically
      sinking into silence, broken but by sighs. So it went on for a few more weeks; then he took
      the advice of his physician to seek change of air and scene. He went away alone, without even
      a servant, not leaving word where he had gone. After a little while he returned, more ailing,
      more broken than before. One morning he was found insensible,—stricken by paralysis. He
      regained consciousness, and even for some days rallied strength. He might have recovered, but
      he seemed as if he tacitly refused to live. He expired at last, peacefully, in Graham’s
      arms.
At the opening of his will it was found that he had left Graham his sole heir and executor.
      Deducting government duties, legacies to servants, and donations to public charities, the sum
      thus bequeathed to his lost wife’s nephew was two hundred and twenty thousand pounds.
With such a fortune, opening indeed was made for an ambition so long obstructed. But Graham
      affected no change in his mode of life; he still retained his modest bachelor’s apartments,
      engaged no servants, bought no horses, in no way exceeded the income he had possessed before.
      He seemed, indeed, depressed rather than elated by the succession to a wealth which he had
      never anticipated.
Two children had been born from the marriage of Richard King: they had died young, it is
      true, but Lady Janet at the time of her own decease was not too advanced in years for the
      reasonable expectation of other offspring; and even after Richard King became a widower, he
      had given to Graham no hint of his testamentary dispositions. The young man was no
      blood-relation to him, and naturally supposed that such relations would become the heirs. But
      in truth the deceased seemed to have no blood-relations: none had ever been known to visit
      him; none raised a voice to question the justice of his will.
Lady Janet had been buried at Kensal Green; her husband’s remains were placed in the same
      vault.
For days and days Graham went his way lonelily to the cemetery. He might be seen standing
      motionless by that tomb, with tears rolling down his cheeks; yet his was not a weak
      nature,—not one of those that love indulgence of irremediable grief. On the contrary, people
      who did not know him well said “that he had more head than heart,” and the character of his
      pursuits, as of his writings, was certainly not that of a sentimentalist. He had not thus
      visited the tomb till Richard King had been placed within it. Yet his love for his aunt was
      unspeakably greater than that which he could have felt for her husband. Was it, then, the
      husband that he so much more acutely mourned; or was there something that, since the husband’s
      death, had deepened his reverence for the memory of her whom he had not only loved as a
      mother, but honoured as a saint?
These visits to the cemetery did not cease till Graham was confined to his bed by a very
      grave illness,—the only one he had ever known. His physician said it was nervous fever, and
      occasioned by moral shock or excitement; it was attended with delirium. His recovery was slow,
      and when it was sufficiently completed he quitted England; and we find him now, with his mind
      composed, his strength restored, and his spirits braced, in that gay city of Paris; hiding,
      perhaps, some earnest purpose amid his participation in its holiday enjoyments. He is now, as
      I have said, seated before his writing-table in deep thought. He takes up a letter which he
      had already glanced over hastily, and reperuses it with more care.
The letter is from his cousin, the Duke of Alton, who had succeeded a few years since to the
      family honours,—an able man, with no small degree of information, an ardent politician, but of
      very rational and temperate opinions; too much occupied by the cares of a princely estate to
      covet office for himself; too sincere a patriot not to desire office for those to whose hands
      he thought the country might be most safely entrusted; an intimate friend of Graham’s. The
      contents of the letter are these:—

 MY DEAR GRAHAM,—I trust that you will welcome the brilliant opening into public life which
      these lines are intended to announce to you. Vavasour has just been with me to say that he
      intends to resign his seat for the county when Parliament meets, and agreeing with me that
      there is no one so fit to succeed him as yourself, he suggests the keeping his intention
      secret until you have arranged your committee and are prepared to take the field. You cannot
      hope to escape a contest; but I have examined the Register, and the party has gained rather
      than lost since the last election, when Vavasour was so triumphantly returned. The expenses
      for this county, where there are so many outvoters to bring up, and so many agents to retain,
      are always large in comparison with some other counties; but that consideration is all in your
      favour, for it deters Squire Hunston, the only man who could beat you, from starting; and to
      your resources a thousand pounds more or less are a trifle not worth discussing. You know how
      difficult it is nowadays to find a seat for a man of moderate opinions like yours and mine.
      Our county would exactly suit you. The constituency is so evenly divided between the urban and
      rural populations, that its representative must fairly consult the interests of both. He can
      be neither an ultra-Tory nor a violent Radical. He is left to the enviable freedom, to which
      you say you aspire, of considering what is best for the country as a whole. Do not lose so
      rare an opportunity. There is but one drawback to your triumphant candidature. It will be said
      that you have no longer an acre in the county in which the Vanes have been settled so long.
      That drawback can be removed. It is true that you can never hope to buy back the estates which
      you were compelled to sell at your father’s death: the old manufacturer gripes them too firmly
      to loosen his hold; and after all, even were your income double what it is, you would be
      overhoused in the vast pile in which your father buried so large a share of his fortune. But
      that beautiful old hunting-lodge, the Stamm Schloss of your family, with the adjacent farms,
      can be now repurchased very reasonably. The brewer who bought them is afflicted with an
      extravagant son, whom he placed in the—Hussars, and will gladly sell the property for L5,000
      more than he gave: well worth the difference, as he has improved the farm- buildings and
      raised the rental. I think, in addition to the sum you have on mortgage, L3,000 will be
      accepted, and as a mere investment pay you nearly three per cent. But to you it is worth more
      than double the money; it once more identifies your ancient name with the county. You would be
      a greater personage with that moderate holding in the district in which your race took root,
      and on which your father’s genius threw such a lustre, than you would be if you invested all
      your wealth in a county in which every squire and farmer would call you “the new man.” Pray
      think over this most seriously, and instruct your solicitor to open negotiations with the
      brewer at once. But rather put yourself into the train, and come back to England straight to
      me. I will ask Vavasour to meet you. What news from Paris? Is the Emperor as ill as the papers
      insinuate? And is the revolutionary party gaining ground? Your affectionate cousin, ALTON.
      
As he put down this letter, Graham heaved a short impatient sigh.
“The old Stamm Schloss,” he muttered,—“a foot on the old soil once more! and an entrance
      into the great arena with hands unfettered. Is it possible!—is it?—is it?”
At this moment the door-bell of the apartment rang, and a servant whom Graham had hired at
      Paris as a laquais de place announced “Ce Monsieur.”
Graham hurried the letter into his portfolio, and said, “You mean the person to whom I am
      always at home?”
“The same, Monsieur.”
“Admit him, of course.”
There entered a wonderfully thin man, middle-aged, clothed in black, his face cleanly
      shaven, his hair cut very short, with one of those faces which, to use a French expression,
      say “nothing.” It was absolutely without expression: it had not even, despite its thinness,
      one salient feature. If you had found yourself anywhere seated next to that man, your eye
      would have passed him over as too insignificant to notice; if at a cafe, you would have gone
      on talking to your friend without lowering your voice. What mattered it whether a bete like
      that overheard or not? Had you been asked to guess his calling and station, you might have
      said, minutely observing the freshness of his clothes and the undeniable respectability of his
      tout ensemble, “He must be well off, and with no care for customers on his mind,—a ci-devant
      chandler who has retired on a legacy.”
Graham rose at the entrance of his visitor, motioned him courteously to a seat beside him,
      and waiting till the laquais had vanished, then asked, “What news?”
“None, I fear, that will satisfy Monsieur. I have certainly hunted out, since I had last the
      honour to see you, no less than four ladies of the name of Duval, but only one of them took
      that name from her parents, and was also christened Louise.”
“Ah—Louise!”
“Yes, the daughter of a perfumer, aged twenty-eight. She, therefore, is not the Louise you
      seek. Permit me to refer to your instructions.” Here M. Renard took out a note-book, turned
      over the leaves, and resumed, “Wanted, Louise Duval, daughter of Auguste Duval, a French
      drawing-master, who lived for many years at Tours, removed to Paris in 1845, lived at No. 12,
      Rue de S—— at Paris for some years, but afterwards moved to a different guartier of the town,
      and died 1848, in Rue I——, No. 39. Shortly after his death, his daughter Louise left that
      lodging, and could not be traced. In 1849 official documents reporting her death were
      forwarded from Munich to a person (a friend of yours, Monsieur). Death, of course, taken for
      granted; but nearly five years afterwards, this very person encountered the said Louise Duval
      at Aix-la-Chapelle, and never heard nor saw more of her. Demande submitted, to find out said
      Louise Duval or any children of hers born in 1848-9; supposed in 1852-3 to have one child, a
      girl, between four and five years old. Is that right, Monsieur?”
“Quite right.”
“And this is the whole information given to me. Monsieur on giving it asked me if I thought
      it desirable that he should commence inquiries at Aix-la-Chapelle, where Louise Duval was last
      seen by the person interested to discover her. I reply, No; pains thrown away. Aix-la-Chapelle
      is not a place where any Frenchwoman not settled there by marriage would remain. Nor does it
      seem probable that the said Duval would venture to select for her residence Munich, a city in
      which she had contrived to obtain certificates of her death. A Frenchwoman who has once known
      Paris always wants to get back to it; especially, Monsieur, if she has the beauty which you
      assign to this lady. I therefore suggested that our inquiries should commence in this capital.
      Monsieur agreed with me, and I did not grudge the time necessary for investigation.”
“You were most obliging. Still I am beginning to be impatient if time is to be thrown
      away.”
“Naturally. Permit me to return to my notes. Monsieur informs me that twenty-one years ago,
      in 1848, the Parisian police were instructed to find out this lady and failed, but gave hopes
      of discovering her through her relations. He asks me to refer to our archives; I tell him that
      is no use. However, in order to oblige him, I do so. No trace of such inquiry: it must have
      been, as Monsieur led me to suppose, a strictly private one, unconnected with crime or with
      politics; and as I have the honour to tell Monsieur, no record of such investigations is
      preserved in our office. Great scandal would there be, and injury to the peace of families, if
      we preserved the results of private inquiries intrusted to us—by absurdly jealous husbands,
      for instance. Honour,—Monsieur, honour forbids it. Next I suggest to Monsieur that his
      simplest plan would be an advertisement in the French journals, stating, if I understand him
      right, that it is for the pecuniary interest of Madame or Mademoiselle Duval, daughter of
      Auguste Duval, artiste en dessin, to come forward. Monsieur objects to that.”
“I object to it extremely; as I have told you, this is a strictly confidential inquiry; and
      an advertisement which in all likelihood would be practically useless (it proved to be so in a
      former inquiry) would not be resorted to unless all else failed, and even then with
      reluctance.”
“Quite so. Accordingly, Monsieur delegates to me, who have been recommended to him as the
      best person he can employ in that department of our police which is not connected with crime
      or political surveillance, a task the most difficult. I have, through strictly private
      investigations, to discover the address and prove the identity of a lady bearing a name among
      the most common in France, and of whom nothing has been heard for fifteen years, and then at
      so migratory an endroit as Aix-la-Chapelle. You will not or cannot inform me if since that
      time the lady has changed her name by marriage.”
“I have no reason to think that she has; and there are reasons against the supposition that
      she married after 1849.”
“Permit me to observe that the more details of information Monsieur can give me, the easier
      my task of research will be.”
“I have given you all the details I can, and, aware of the difficulty of tracing a person
      with a name so much the reverse of singular, I adopted your advice in our first interview, of
      asking some Parisian friend of mine, with a large acquaintance in the miscellaneous societies
      of your capital, to inform me of any ladies of that name whom he might chance to encounter;
      and he, like you, has lighted upon one or two, who alas! resemble the right one in name and
      nothing more.”
“You will do wisely to keep him on the watch as well as myself. If it were but a murderess
      or a political incendiary, then you might trust exclusively to the enlightenment of our corps,
      but this seems an affair of sentiment, Monsieur. Sentiment is not in our way. Seek the trace
      of that in the haunts of pleasure.”
M. Renard, having thus poetically delivered himself of that philosophical dogma, rose to
      depart.
Graham slipped into his hand a bank-note of sufficient value to justify the profound bow he
      received in return.
When M. Renard had gone, Graham heaved another impatient sigh, and said to himself, “No, it
      is not possible,—at least not yet.”
Then, compressing his lips as a man who forces himself to something he dislikes, he dipped
      his pen into the inkstand, and wrote rapidly thus to his kinsman:

 MY DEAR COUSIN,—I lose not a post in replying to your kind and considerate letter. It is
      not in my power at present to return to England. I need not say how fondly I cherish the hope
      of representing the dear old county some day. If Vavasour could be induced to defer his
      resignation of the seat for another session, or at least for six or seven months, why then I
      might be free to avail myself of the opening; at present I am not. Meanwhile I am sorely
      tempted to buy back the old Lodge; probably the brewer would allow me to leave on mortgage the
      sum I myself have on the property, and a few additional thousands. I have reasons for not
      wishing to transfer at present much of the money now invested in the Funds. I will consider
      this point, which probably does not press. I reserve all Paris news till my next; and begging
      you to forgive so curt and unsatisfactory a reply to a letter so important that it excites me
      more than I like to own, believe me your affectionate friend and cousin, GRAHAM. 
