
CHAPTER IV.
Three days elapsed before Graham again saw M. Lebeau. The letter-writer did not show himself
      at the cafe, and was not to be found at his office, the ordinary business of which was
      transacted by his clerk, saying that his master was much engaged on important matters that
      took him from home.
Graham naturally thought that these matters concerned the discovery of Louise Duval, and was
      reconciled to suspense. At the cafe, awaiting Lebeau, he had slid into some acquaintance with
      the ouvrier Armand Monnier, whose face and talk had before excited his interest. Indeed, the
      acquaintance had been commenced by the ouvrier, who seated himself at a table near to
      Graham’s, and, after looking at him earnestly for some minutes, said, “You are waiting for
      your antagonist at dominos, M. Lebeau,—a very remarkable man.”
“So he seems. I know, however, but little of him. You, perhaps, have known him longer?”
“Several months. Many of your countrymen frequent this cafe, but you do not seem to care to
      associate with the blouses.”
“It is not that; but we islanders are shy, and don’t make acquaintance with each other
      readily. By the way, since you so courteously accost me, I may take the liberty of saying that
      I overheard you defend the other night, against one of my countrymen, who seemed to me to talk
      great nonsense, the existence of le bon Dieu. You had much the best of it. I rather gathered
      from your argument that you went somewhat further, and were not too enlightened to admit of
      Christianity.”
Armand Monnier looked pleased. He liked praise; and he liked to hear himself talk, and he
      plunged at once into a very complicated sort of Christianity,—partly Arian, partly Saint
      Simonian, with a little of Rousseau and a great deal of Armand Monnier. Into this we need not
      follow him; but, in sum, it was a sort of Christianity, the main heads of which consisted in
      the removal of your neighbour’s landmarks, in the right of the poor to appropriate the
      property of the rich, in the right of love to dispense with marriage, and the duty of the
      State to provide for any children that might result from such union,—the parents being
      incapacitated to do so, as whatever they might leave was due to the treasury in common. Graham
      listened to these doctrines with melancholy not unmixed with contempt. “Are these opinions of
      yours,” he asked, “derived from reading or your own reflection?”
“Well, from both, but from circumstances in life that induced me to read and reflect. I am
      one of the many victims of the tyrannical law of marriage. When very young I married a woman
      who made me miserable, and then forsook me. Morally, she has ceased to be my wife; legally,
      she is. I then met with another woman who suits me, who loves me. She lives with me; I cannot
      marry her; she has to submit to humiliations, to be called contemptuously an ouvrier’s
      mistress. Then, though before I was only a Republican, I felt there was something wrong in
      society which needed a greater change than that of a merely political government; and then,
      too, when I was all troubled and sore, I chanced to read one of Madame de Grantmesnil’s books.
      A glorious genius that woman’s!”
“She has genius, certainly,” said Graham, with a keen pang at his heart,—Madame de
      Grantmesnil, the dearest friend of Isaura! “But,” he added, “though I believe that eloquent
      author has indirectly assailed certain social institutions, including that of marriage, I am
      perfectly persuaded that she never designed to effect such complete overthrow of the system
      which all civilized communities have hitherto held in reverence as your doctrines would
      attempt; and, after all, she but expresses her ideas through the medium of fabulous incidents
      and characters. And men of your sense should not look for a creed in the fictions of poets and
      romance-writers.”
“Ah,” said Monnier, “I dare say neither Madame de Grantmesnil nor even Rousseau ever even
      guessed the ideas they awoke in their readers; but one idea leads on to another. And genuine
      poetry and romance touch the heart so much more than dry treatises. In a word, Madame de
      Grantmesnil’s book set me thinking; and then I read other books, and talked with clever men,
      and educated myself. And so I became the man I am.” Here, with a self-satisfied air, Monnier
      bowed to the Englishman, and joined a group at the other end of the room.
The next evening, just before dusk, Graham Vane was seated musingly in his own apartment in
      the Faubourg Montmartre, when there came a slight knock at his door. He was so wrapped in
      thought that he did not hear the sound, though twice repeated. The door opened gently, and M.
      Lebeau appeared on the threshold. The room was lighted only by the gas-lamp from the street
      without.
Lebeau advanced through the gloom, and quietly seated himself in the corner of the fireplace
      opposite to Graham before he spoke. “A thousand pardons for disturbing your slumbers, Monsieur
      Lamb.”
Startled then by the voice so near him, Graham raised his head, looked round, and beheld
      very indistinctly the person seated so near him.
“Monsieur Lebeau?”
“At your service. I promise to give an answer to your question; accept my apologies that it
      has been deferred so long. I shall not this evening go to our cafe. I took the liberty of
      calling—”
“Monsieur Lebeau, you are a brick.”
“A what, Monsieur!—a brique?”
“I forgot; you are not up to our fashionable London idioms. A brick means a jolly fellow,
      and it is very kind in you to call. What is your decision?”
“Monsieur, I can give you some information, but it is so slight that I offer it gratis, and
      forego all thought of undertaking further inquiries. They could only be prosecuted in another
      country, and it would not be worth my while to leave Paris on the chance of gaining so
      trifling a reward as you propose. Judge for yourself. In the year 1849, and in the month of
      July, Louise Duval left Paris for Aix-la-Chapelle. There she remained some weeks, and then
      left it. I can learn no further traces of her movements.”
“Aix-la-Chapelle! What could she do there?”
“It is a Spa in great request; crowded during the summer season with visitors from all
      countries. She might have gone there for health or for pleasure.”
“Do you think that one could learn more at the Spa itself if one went there?”
“Possibly. But it is so long,—twenty years ago.”
“She might have revisited the place.”
“Certainly; but I know no more.”
“Was she there under the same name,—Duval?”
“I am sure of that.”
“Do you think she left it alone or with others? You tell me she was awfully belle; she might
      have attracted admirers.”
“If,” answered Lebeau, reluctantly, “I could believe the report of my informant, Louise
      Duval left Aix not alone, but with some gallant; not an Englishman. They are said to have
      parted soon, and the man is now dead. But, speaking frankly, I do not think Mademoiselle Duval
      would have thus compromised her honour and sacrificed her future. I believe she would have
      scorned all proposals that were not those of marriage. But all I can say for certainty is that
      nothing is known to me of her fate since she quitted Aix-la-Chapelle.”
“In 1849? She had then a child living.”
“A child? I never heard that she had any child; and I do not believe she could have had any
      child in 1849.”
Graham mused. Somewhat less than five years after 1849 Louise Duval had been seen at
      Aix-la-Chapelle. Possibly she found some attraction at that place, and might yet be discovered
      there. “Monsieur Lebeau,” said Graham, “you know this lady by sight; you would recognize her
      in spite of the lapse of years. Will you go to Aix and find out there what you can? Of course,
      expenses will be paid, and the reward will be given if you succeed.”
“I cannot oblige you. My interest in this poor lady is not very strong, though I should be
      willing to serve her, and glad to know that she were alive. I have now business on hand which
      interests me much more, and which will take me from Paris, but not in the direction of
      Aix.”
“If I wrote to my employer, and got him to raise the reward to some higher amount, that
      might make it worth your while?”
“I should still answer that my affairs will not permit such a journey. But if there be any
      chance of tracing Louise Duval at Aix,—and there may be,—you would succeed quite as well as I
      should. You must judge for yourself if it be worth your trouble to attempt such a task; and if
      you do attempt it, and do succeed, pray let me know.—A line to my office will reach me for
      some little time, even if I am absent from Paris. Adieu, Monsieur Lamb.”
Here M. Lebeau Lose and departed.
Graham relapsed into thought; but a train of thought much more active, much more concentred
      than before. “No,” thus ran his meditations,—“no, it would not be safe to employ that man
      further. The reasons that forbid me to offer any very high reward for the discovery of this
      woman operate still more strongly against tendering to her own relation a sum that might
      indeed secure his aid, but would unquestionably arouse his suspicions, and perhaps drag into
      light all that must be concealed. Oh, this cruel mission! I am, indeed, an impostor to myself
      till it be fulfilled. I will go to Aix, and take Renard with me. I am impatient till I set
      out, but I cannot quit Paris without once more seeing Isaura. She consents to relinquish the
      stage; surely I could wean her too from intimate friendship with a woman whose genius has so
      fatal an effect upon enthusiastic minds. And then—and then?”
He fell into a delightful revery; and contemplating Isaura as his future wife, he surrounded
      her sweet image with all those attributes of dignity and respect with which an Englishman is
      accustomed to invest the destined bearer of his name, the gentle sovereign of his household,
      the sacred mother of his children. In this picture the more brilliant qualities of Isaura
      found, perhaps, but faint presentation. Her glow of sentiment, her play of fancy, her artistic
      yearnings for truths remote, for the invisible fairyland of beautiful romance, receded into
      the background of the picture. It was all these, no doubt, that had so strengthened and
      enriched the love at first sight, which had shaken the equilibrium of his positive existence;
      and yet he now viewed all these as subordinate to the one image of mild decorous matronage
      into which wedlock was to transform the child of genius, longing for angel wings and unlimited
      space.
