
CHAPTER IX.
The next day Duplessis was surprised by a visit from M. Louvier—that magnate of millionaires
      had never before set foot in the house of his younger and less famous rival.
The burly man entered the room with a face much flushed, and with more than his usual
      mixture of jovial brusquerie and opulent swagger.
“Startled to see me, I dare say,” began Louvier, as soon as the door was closed. “I have
      this morning received a communication from your agent containing a cheque for the interest due
      to me from M. Rochebriant, and a formal notice of your intention to pay off the principal on
      behalf of that popinjay prodigal. Though we two have not hitherto been the best friends in the
      world, I thought it fair to a man in your station to come to you direct and say, ‘Cher
      confrere, what swindler has bubbled you? You don’t know the real condition of this Breton
      property, or you would never so throw away your millions. The property is not worth the
      mortgage I have on it by 30,000 louis.”
“Then, M. Louvier, you will be 30,000 louis the richer if I take the mortgage off your
      hands.”
“I can afford the loss—no offence—better than you can; and I may have fancies which I don’t
      mind paying for, but which cannot influence another. See, I have brought with me the exact
      schedule of all details respecting this property. You need not question their accuracy; they
      have been arranged by the Marquis’s own agents, M. Gandrin and M. Hebert. They contain, you
      will perceive, every possible item of revenue, down to an apple-tree. Now, look at that, and
      tell me if you are justified in lending such a sum on such a property.”
“Thank you very much for an interest in my affairs that I scarcely ventured to expect M.
      Louvier to entertain; but I see that I have a duplicate of this paper, furnished to me very
      honestly by M. Hebert himself. Besides, I, too, have fancies which I don’t mind paying for,
      and among them may be a fancy for the lands of Rochebriant.”
“Look you, Duplessis, when a man like me asks a favour, you may be sure that he has the
      power to repay it. Let me have my whim here, and ask anything you like from me in return!”
“Desole not to oblige you, but this has become not only a whim of mine, but a matter of
      honour; and honour you know, my dear M. Louvier, is the first principle of sound finance. I
      have myself, after careful inspection of the Rochebriant property, volunteered to its owner to
      advance the money to pay off your hypotheque; and what would be said on the Bourse if Lucien
      Duplessis failed in an obligation?”
“I think I can guess what will one day be said of Lucien Duplessis if he make an irrevocable
      enemy of Paul Louvier. Corbleu! mon cher, a man of thrice your capital, who watched every
      speculation of yours with a hostile eye, might some beau jour make even you a bankrupt!”
“Forewarned, forearmed!” replied Duplessis, imperturbably, “Fas est ab hoste doceri,—I mean,
      ‘It is right to be taught by an enemy;’ and I never remember the day when you were otherwise,
      and yet I am not a bankrupt, though I receive you in a house which, thanks to you, is so
      modest in point of size!”
“Bah! that was a mistake of mine,—and, ha! ha! you had your revenge there—that forest!”
“Well, as a peace offering, I will give you up the forest, and content my ambition as a
      landed proprietor with this bad speculation of Rochebriant!”
“Confound the forest, I don’t care for it now! I can sell my place for more than it has cost
      me to one of your imperial favourites. Build a palace in your forest. Let me have Rochebriant,
      and name your terms.”
“A thousand pardons! but I have already had the honour to inform you, that I have contracted
      an obligation which does not allow me to listen to terms.”
As a serpent, that, after all crawlings and windings, rears itself on end, Louvier rose,
      crest erect:
“So then it is finished. I came here disposed to offer peace—you refuse, and declare
      war.”
“Not at all, I do not declare war; I accept it if forced on me.”
“Is that your last word, M. Duplessis?”
“Monsieur Louvier, it is.”
“Bon jour!”
And Louvier strode to the door; here he paused: “Take a day to consider.”
“Not a moment.”
“Your servant, Monsieur,—your very humble servant.” Louvier vanished.
Duplessis leaned his large thoughtful forehead on his thin nervous hand. “This loan will
      pinch me,” he muttered. “I must be very wary now with such a foe. Well, why should I care to
      be rich? Valerie’s dot, Valerie’s happiness, are secured.”
