
CHAPTER IV.
M. Mauleon was somewhat surprised by Raoul’s visit the next morning. He had no great liking
      for a kinsman whose politely distant reserve towards him, in contrast to poor Euguerrand’s
      genial heartiness, had much wounded his sensitive self-respect; nor could he comprehend the
      religious scruples which forbade Raoul to take a soldier’s share in the battle-field, though
      in seeking there to save the lives of others so fearlessly hazarding his own life.
“Pardon,” said Raoul, with his sweet mournful smile, “the unseasonable hour at which I
      disturb you. But your duties on the ramparts and mine in the hospital begin early, and I have
      promised the Abbe Vertpre to communicate a message of a nature which perhaps you may deem
      pressing.” He proceeded at once to repeat what the Abbe had communicated to him the night
      before relative to the illness and the request of the nun.
“Louise Duval!” exclaimed the Vicomte, “discovered at last, and a religieuse! Ah! I now
      understand why she never sought me out when I reappeared at Paris. Tidings of that sort do not
      penetrate the walls of a convent. I am greatly obliged to you, M. de Vandemar, for the trouble
      you have so kindly taken. This poor nun is related to me, and I will at once obey the summons.
      But this convent des ———- I am ashamed to say I know not where it is. A long way off, I
      suppose?”
“Allow me to be your guide,” said Raoul; “I should take it as a favour to be allowed to see
      a little more of a man whom my lost brother held in such esteem.”
Victor was touched by this conciliatory speech, and in a few minutes more the two men were
      on their way to the convent on the other side of the Seine.
Victor commenced the conversation by a warm and heartfelt tribute to Euguerrand’s character
      and memory. “I never,” he said, “knew a nature more rich in the most endearing qualities of
      youth; so gentle, so high-spirited, rendering every virtue more attractive, and redeeming such
      few faults or foibles as youth so situated and so tempted cannot wholly escape, with an
      urbanity not conventional, not artificial, but reflected from the frankness of a genial temper
      and the tenderness of a generous heart. Be comforted for his loss, my kinsman. A brave death
      was the proper crown of that beautiful life.”
Raoul made no answer, but pressed gratefully the arm now linked within his own. The
      companions walked on in silence; Victor’s mind settling on the visit he was about to make to
      the niece so long mysteriously lost, and now so unexpectedly found. Louise had inspired him
      with a certain interest from her beauty and force of character, but never with any warm
      affection. He felt relieved to find that her life had found its close in the sanctuary of the
      convent. He had never divested himself of a certain fear, inspired by Louvier’s statement that
      she might live to bring scandal and disgrace on the name he had with so much difficulty, and
      after so lengthened an anguish, partially cleared in his own person.
Raoul left De Mauleon at the gate of the convent, and took his way towards the hospitals
      where he visited, and the poor whom he relieved.
Victor was conducted silently into the convent parloir; and, after waiting there several
      minutes, the door opened, and the Superieure entered. As she advanced towards him, with
      stately step and solemn visage, De Mauleon recoiled, and uttered a half-suppressed exclamation
      that partook both of amaze and awe. Could it be possible? Was this majestic woman, with the
      grave impassible aspect, once the ardent girl whose tender letters he had cherished through
      stormy years, and only burned on the night before the most perilous of his battle-fields? This
      the one, the sole one, whom in his younger dreams he had seen as his destined wife? It was
      so—it was. Doubt vanished when he heard her voice; and yet how different every tone, every
      accent, from those of the low, soft, thrilling music that had breathed in the voice of
      old!
“M. de Mauleon,” said the Superieure, calmly, “I grieve to sadden you by very mournful
      intelligence. Yesterday evening, when the Abbe undertook to convey to you the request of our
      Sister Ursula, although she was beyond mortal hope of recovery—as otherwise you will conceive
      that I could not have relaxed the rules of this house so as to sanction your visit—there was
      no apprehension of immediate danger. It was believed that her sufferings would be prolonged
      for some days. I saw her late last night before retiring to my cell, and she seemed even
      stronger than she had been for the last week. A sister remained at watch in her cell. Towards
      morning she fell into apparently quiet sleep, and in that sleep she passed away.” The
      Superieure here crossed herself, and murmured pious words in Latin. “Dead! my poor niece!”
      said Victor, feelingly, roused from his stun at the first sight of the Superieure by her
      measured tones, and the melancholy information she so composedly conveyed to him. “I cannot,
      then, even learn why she so wished to see me once more,—or what she might have requested at my
      hands!”
“Pardon, M. le Vicomte. Such sorrowful consolation I have resolved to afford you, not
      without scruples of conscience, but not without sanction of the excellent Abbe Vertpre, whom I
      summoned early this morning to decide my duties in the sacred office I hold. As soon as Sister
      Ursula heard of your return to Paris, she obtained my permission to address to you a letter,
      subjected, when finished, to my perusal and sanction. She felt that she had much on her mind
      which her feeble state might forbid her to make known to you in conversation with ‘sufficient
      fulness; and as she could only have seen you in presence of one of the sisters she imagined
      that there would also be less restraint in a written communication. In fine, her request was
      that, when you called, I might first place this letter in your hands, and allow you time to
      read it, before being admitted to her presence; when a few words conveying your promise to
      attend to the wishes with which you would then be acquainted, would suffice for an interview
      in her exhausted condition. Do I make myself understood?”
“Certainly, Madame,—and the letter?”
“She had concluded last evening; and when I took leave of her later in the night, she placed
      it in my hands for approval. M. le Vicomte, it pains me to say that there is much in the tone
      of that letter which I grieve for and condemn. And it was my intention to point this out to
      our sister at morning, and tell her that passages must be altered before I could give to you
      the letter. Her sudden decease deprived me of this opportunity. I could not, of course, alter
      or erase a line—a word. My only option was to suppress the letter altogether, or give it you
      intact. The Abbe thinks that, on the whole, my duty does not forbid the dictate of my own
      impulse—my own feelings; and I now place this letter in your hands.”
De Mauleon took a packet, unsealed, from the thin white fingers of the Superieure; and as he
      bent to receive it, lifted towards her eyes eloquent with sorrowful, humble pathos, in which
      it was impossible for the heart of a woman who had loved not to see a reference to the past
      which the lips did not dare to utter.
A faint, scarce-perceptible blush stole over the marble cheek of the nun. But, with an
      exquisite delicacy, in which survived the woman while reigned the nun, she replied to the
      appeal.
“M. Victor de Mauleon, before, having thus met, we part for ever, permit a poor religieuse
      to say with what joy—a joy rendered happier because it was tearful—I have learned through the
      Abbe Vertpre that the honour which, as between man and man, no one who had once known you
      could ever doubt, you have lived to vindicate from calumny.”
“Ah; you have heard that—at last, at last!”
“I repeat—of the honour thus deferred, I never doubted.” The Superieure hurried on. “Greater
      joy it has been to me to hear from the same venerable source that, while found bravest among
      the defenders of your country, you are clear from all alliance with the assailants of your
      God. Continue so, continue so, Victor de Mauleon.”
She retreated to the door, and then turned towards him with a look in which all the marble
      had melted away, adding, with words more formally nunlike, yet unmistakably womanlike, than
      those which had gone before, “That to the last you may be true to God, is a prayer never by me
      omitted.”
She spoke, and vanished.
In a kind of dim and dreamlike bewilderment, Victor de Mauleon found himself without the
      walls of the convent. Mechanically, as a man does when the routine of his life is presented to
      him, from the first Minister of State to the poor clown at a suburban theatre, doomed to
      appear at their posts, to prose on a Beer Bill, or grin through a horse-collar, though their
      hearts are bleeding at every pore with some household or secret affliction,—mechanically De
      Mauldon went his way towards the ramparts, at a section of which he daily drilled his raw
      recruits. Proverbial for his severity towards those who offended, for the cordiality of his
      praise of those who pleased his soldierly judgment, no change of his demeanour was visible
      that morning, save that he might be somewhat milder to the one, somewhat less hearty to the
      other. This routine duty done, he passed slowly towards a more deserted because a more exposed
      part of the defences, and seated himself on the frozen sward alone. The cannon thundered
      around him. He heard unconsciously: from time to time an obus hissed and splintered close at
      his feet;—he saw with abstracted eye. His soul was with the past; and, brooding over all that
      in the past lay buried there, came over him a conviction of the vanity of the human
      earth-bounded objects for which we burn or freeze, far more absolute than had grown out of the
      worldly cynicism connected with his worldly ambition. The sight of that face, associated with
      the one pure romance of his reckless youth, the face of one so estranged, so serenely aloft
      from all memories of youth, of romance, of passion, smote him in the midst of the new hopes of
      the new career, as the look on the skull of the woman he had so loved and so mourned, when
      disburied from her grave, smote the brilliant noble who became the stern reformer of La
      Trappe. And while thus gloomily meditating, the letter of the poor Louise Duval was forgotten.
      She whose existence had so troubled, and crossed, and partly marred the lives of others,—she,
      scarcely dead, and already forgotten by her nearest kin. Well—had she not forgotten, put
      wholly out of her mind, all that was due to those much nearer to her than is an uncle to a
      niece?
The short, bitter, sunless day was advancing towards its decline before Victor roused
      himself with a quick impatient start from his reverie, and took forth the letter from the dead
      nun.
It began with expressions of gratitude, of joy at the thought that she should see him again
      before she died, thank him for his past kindness, and receive, she trusted, his assurance that
      he would attend to her last remorseful injunctions. I pass over much that followed in the
      explanation of events in her life sufficiently known to the reader. She stated, as the
      strongest reason why she had refused the hand of Louvier, her knowledge that she should in due
      time become a mother—a fact concealed from Victor, secure that he would then urge her not to
      annul her informal marriage, but rather insist on the ceremonies that would render it valid.
      She touched briefly on her confidential intimacy with Madame Marigny, the exchange of name and
      papers, her confinement in the neighbourhood of Aix, the child left to the care of the nurse,
      the journey to Munich to find the false Louise Duval was no more. The documents obtained
      through the agency of her easy-tempered kinsman, the late Marquis de Rochebriant, and her
      subsequent domestication in the house of the von Rudesheims,—all this it is needless to do
      more here than briefly recapitulate. The letter then went on: “While thus kindly treated by
      the family with whom nominally a governess, I was on the terms of a friend with Signor
      Ludovico Cicogna, an Italian of noble birth. He was the only man I ever cared for. I loved him
      with frail human passion. I could not tell him, my true history. I could not tell him that I
      had a child; such intelligence would have made him renounce me at once. He had a daughter,
      still but an infant, by a former marriage, then brought up in France. He wished to take her to
      his house, and his second wife to supply the place of her mother. What was I to do with the
      child I had left near Aix? While doubtful and distracted, I read an advertisement in the
      journals to the effect that a French lady, then staying in Coblentz, wished to adopt a female
      child not exceeding the age of six: the child to be wholly resigned to her by the parents, she
      undertaking to rear and provide for it as her own. I resolved to go to Coblentz at once. I did
      so. I saw this lady. She seemed in affluent circumstances, yet young, but a confirmed invalid,
      confined the greater part of the day to her sofa by some malady of the spine. She told me very
      frankly her story. She had been a professional dancer on the stage, had married respectably,
      quitted the stage, become a widow, and shortly afterwards been seized with the complaint that
      would probably for life keep her a secluded prisoner in her room. Thus afflicted, and without
      tie, interest, or object in the world, she conceived the idea of adopting a child that she
      might bring up to tend and cherish her as a daughter. In this, the imperative condition was
      that the child should never be sought by the parents. She was pleased by my manner and
      appearance: she did not wish her adopted daughter to be the child of peasants. She asked me
      for no references,—made no inquiries. She said cordially that she wished for no knowledge
      that, through any indiscretion of her own, communicated to the child might lead her to seek
      the discovery of her real parents. In fine, I left Coblentz on the understanding that I was to
      bring the infant, and if it pleased Madame Surville, the agreement was concluded.
“I then repaired to Aix. I saw the child. Alas! unnatural mother that I was, the sight only
      more vividly brought before me the sense of my own perilous position. Yet the child was
      lovely! a likeness of myself, but lovelier far, for it was a pure, innocent, gentle
      loveliness. And they told her to call me ‘Maman.’ Oh, did I not relent when I heard that name?
      No; it jarred on my ear as a word of reproach and shame. In walking with the infant towards
      the railway station, imagine my dismay when suddenly I met the man who had been taught to
      believe me dead. I soon discovered that his dismay was equal to my own,—that I had nothing to
      fear from his desire to claim me. It did occur to me for a moment to resign his child to him.
      But when he shrank reluctantly from a half suggestion to that effect, my pride was wounded, my
      conscience absolved. And, after all, it might be unsafe to my future to leave with him any
      motive for tracing me. I left him hastily. I have never seen nor heard of him more. I took the
      child to Coblentz. Madame Surville was charmed with its prettiness and prattle,—charmed still
      more when I rebuked the poor infant for calling me ‘Maman,’ and said, ‘Thy real mother is
      here.’ Freed from my trouble, I returned to the kind German roof I had quitted, and shortly
      after became the wife of Ludovico Cicogna.
“My punishment soon began. His was a light, fickle, pleasure-hunting nature. He soon grew
      weary of me. My very love made me unamiable to him. I became irritable, jealous, exacting. His
      daughter, who now came to live with us, was another subject of discord. I knew that he loved
      her better than me. I became a harsh step-mother; and Ludovico’s reproaches, vehemently made,
      nursed all my angriest passions. But a son of this new marriage was born to myself. My pretty
      Luigi! how my heart became wrapt up in him! Nursing him, I forgot resentment against his
      father. Well, poor Cicogna fell ill and died. I mourned him sincerely; but my boy was left.
      Poverty then fell on me,—poverty extreme. Cicogna’s sole income was derived from a post in the
      Austrian dominion in Italy, and ceased with it. He received a small pension in compensation;
      that died with him.
“At this time, an Englishman, with whom Ludovico had made acquaintance in Venice, and who
      visited often at our house in Verona, offered me his hand. He had taken an extraordinary
      liking to Isaura, Cicogna’s daughter by his first marriage. But I think his proposal was
      dictated partly by compassion for me, and more by affection for her. For the sake of my boy
      Luigi I married him. He was a good man, of retired learned habits with which I had no
      sympathy. His companionship overwhelmed me with ennui. But I bore it patiently for Luigi’s
      sake. God saw that my heart was as much as ever estranged from Him, and He took away my all on
      earth—my boy. Then in my desolation I turned to our Holy Church for comfort. I found a friend
      in the priest, my confessor. I was startled to learn from him how guilty I had been—was still.
      Pushing to an extreme the doctrines of the Church, he would not allow that my first marriage,
      though null by law, was void in the eyes of Heaven. Was not the death of the child I so
      cherished a penalty due to my sin towards the child I had abandoned?
“These thoughts pressed on me night and day. With the consent and approval of the good
      priest, I determined to quit the roof of M. Selby, and to devote myself to the discovery of my
      forsaken Julie.
“I had a painful interview with M. Selby. I announced my intention to separate from him. I
      alleged as a reason my conscientious repugnance to live with a professed heretic—an enemy to
      our Holy Church. When M. Selby found that he could not shake my resolution, he lent himself to
      it with the forbearance and generosity which he had always exhibited. On our marriage he had
      settled on me five thousand pounds, to be absolutely mine in the event of his death. He now
      proposed to concede to me the interest on that capital during his life, and he undertook the
      charge of my step-daughter Isaura, and secured to her all the rest he had to leave; such
      landed property as he possessed in England passing to a distant relative.
“So we parted, not with hostility—tears were shed on both sides. I set out for Coblentz.
      Madame Surville had long since quitted that town, devoting some years to the round of various
      mineral spas in vain hope of cure. Not without some difficulty I traced her to her last
      residence in the neighbourhood of Paris, but she was then no more—her death accelerated by the
      shock occasioned by the loss of her whole fortune, which she had been induced to place in one
      of the numerous fraudulent companies by which so many have been ruined. Julie, who was with
      her at the time of her death, had disappeared shortly after it—none could tell me whither; but
      from such hints as I could gather, the poor child, thus left destitute, had been betrayed into
      sinful courses.
“Probably I might yet by searching inquiry have found her out; you will say it was my duty
      at least to institute such inquiry. No doubt; I now remorsefully feel that it was. I did not
      think so at the time. The Italian priest had given me a few letters of introduction to French
      ladies with whom, when they had sojourned at Florence, he had made acquaintance. These ladies
      were very strict devotees, formal observers of those decorums by which devotion proclaims
      itself to the world. They had received me not only with kindness but with marked respect. They
      chose to exalt into the noblest self-sacrifice the act of my leaving M. Selby’s house.
      Exaggerating the simple cause assigned to it in the priest’s letter, they represented me as
      quitting a luxurious home and an idolising husband rather than continue intimate intercourse
      with the enemy of my religion. This new sort of flattery intoxicated me with its fumes. I
      recoiled from the thought of shattering the pedestal to which I had found myself elevated.
      What if I should discover my daughter in one from the touch of whose robe these holy women
      would recoil as from the rags of a leper! No; it would be impossible for me to own
      her—impossible for me to give her the shelter of my roof. Nay, if discovered to hold any
      commune with such an outcast, no explanation, no excuse short of the actual truth, would avail
      with these austere judges of human error. And the actual truth would be yet deeper disgrace. I
      reasoned away my conscience. If I looked for example in the circles in which I had obtained
      reverential place, I could find no instance in which a girl who had fallen from virtue was not
      repudiated by her nearest relatives. Nay, when I thought of my own mother, had not her father
      refused to see her, to acknowledge her child, from no other offence than that of a misalliance
      which wounded the family pride? That pride, alas! was in my blood—my sole inheritance from the
      family I sprang from.
“Thus it went on, till I had grave symptoms of a disease which rendered the duration of my
      life uncertain. My conscience awoke and tortured me. I resolved to take the veil. Vanity and
      pride again! My resolution was applauded by those whose opinion had so swayed my mind and my
      conduct. Before I retired into the convent from which I write, I made legal provision as to
      the bulk of the fortune which, by the death of M. Selby, has become absolutely at my disposal.
      One thousand pounds amply sufficed for dotation to the convent: the other four thousand pounds
      are given in trust to the eminent notary, M. Nadaud, Rue ———-. On applying to him, you will
      find that the sum, with the accumulated interest, is bequeathed to you,—a tribute of gratitude
      for the assistance you afforded me in the time of your own need, and the kindness with which
      you acknowledged our relationship and commiserated my misfortunes.
“But oh, my uncle, find out—a man can do so with a facility not accorded to a woman—what has
      become of this poor Julie, and devote what you may deem right and just of the sum thus
      bequeathed to place her above want and temptation. In doing so, I know you will respect my
      name: I would not have it dishonour you, indeed.
“I have been employed in writing this long letter since the day I heard you were in Paris.
      It has exhausted the feeble remnants of my strength. It will be given to you before the
      interview I at once dread and long for, and in that interview you will not rebuke me. Will
      you, my kind uncle? No, you will only soothe and pity!
“Would that I were worthy to pray for others, that I might add, ‘May the Saints have you in
      their keeping and lead you to faith in the Holy Church, which has power to absolve from sins
      those who repent as I do.’”
The letter dropped from Victor’s hand. He took it up, smoothed it mechanically, and with a
      dim, abstracted, be wildered, pitiful wonder. Well might the Superieure have hesitated to
      allow confessions, betraying a mind so little regulated by genuine religious faith, to pass
      into other hands. Evidently it was the paramount duty of rescuing from want or from sin the
      writer’s forsaken child, that had overborne all other considerations in the mind of the Woman
      and the Priest she consulted.
Throughout that letter, what a strange perversion of understanding! what a half-unconscious
      confusion of wrong and right!—the duty marked out so obvious and so neglected; even the
      religious sentiment awakened by the conscience so dividing itself from the moral instinct! the
      dread of being thought less religious by obscure comparative strangers stronger than the moral
      obligation to discover and reclaim the child for whose errors, if she had erred, the mother
      who so selfishly forsook her was alone responsible! even at the last, at the approach of
      death, the love for a name she had never made a self-sacrifice to preserve unstained; and that
      concluding exhortation,—that reliance on a repentance in which there was so qualified a
      reparation!
More would Victor de Mauldon have wondered had he known those points of similarity in
      character, and in the nature of their final bequests, between Louise Duval and the husband she
      had deserted. By one of those singular coincidences which, if this work be judged by the
      ordinary rules presented to the ordinary novel-reader, a critic would not unjustly impute to
      defective invention in the author, the provision for this child, deprived of its natural
      parents during their lives, is left to the discretion and honour of trustees, accompanied on
      the part of the consecrated Louise and “the blameless King,” with the injunction of respect to
      their worldly reputations—two parents so opposite in condition, in creed, in disposition, yet
      assimilating in that point of individual character in which it touches the wide vague circle
      of human opinion. For this, indeed, the excuses of Richard King are strong, inasmuch as the
      secrecy he sought was for the sake, not of his own memory, but that of her whom the world knew
      only as his honoured wife. The conduct of Louise admits no such excuse; she dies as she had
      lived; an Egotist. But, whatever the motives of the parents, what is the fate of the deserted
      child? What revenge does the worldly opinion, which the parents would escape for themselves,
      inflict on the innocent infant to whom the bulk of their worldly possessions is to be
      clandestinely conveyed? Would all the gold of Ophir be compensation enough for her?
Slowly De Mauleon roused himself, and turned from the solitary place where he had been
      seated to a more crowded part of the ramparts. He passed a group of young Moblots, with
      flowers wreathed round their gun-barrels. “If,” said one of them gaily, “Paris wants bread, it
      never wants flowers.” His companions laughed merrily, and burst out into a scurrile song in
      ridicule of St. Trochu. Just then an obus fell a few yards before the group. The sound only
      for a moment drowned the song, but the splinters struck a man in a coarse, ragged dress, who
      had stopped to listen to the singers. At his sharp cry, two men hastened to his side: one was
      Victor de Mauleon; the other was a surgeon, who quitted another group of idlers—National
      Guards—attracted by the shriek that summoned his professional aid. The poor man was terribly
      wounded. The surgeon, glancing at De Mauleon, shrugged his shoulders, and muttered, “Past
      help!” The sufferer turned his haggard eyes on the Vicomte, and gasped out, “M. de
      Mauleon?”
“That is my name,” answered Victor, surprised, and not immediately recognising the
      sufferer.
“Hist, Jean Lebeau!—look at me: you recollect me now,—Mart le Roux, concierge to the Secret
      Council. Ay, I found out who you were long ago—followed you home from the last meeting you
      broke up. But I did not betray you, or you would have been murdered long since. Beware of the
      old set—beware of—of—” Here his voice broke off into shrill exclamations of pain. Curbing his
      last agonies with a powerful effort, he faltered forth, “You owe me a service—see to the
      little one at home—she is starving.” The death-rale came on; in a few moments he was no
      more.
Victor gave orders for the removal of the corpse, and hurried away. The surgeon, who had
      changed countenance when he overheard the name in which the dying man had addressed De
      Mauleon, gazed silently after De Mauleon’s retreating form, and then, also quitting the dead,
      rejoined the group he had quitted. Some of those who composed it acquired evil renown later in
      the war of the Communists, and came to disastrous ends: among that number the Pole Loubinsky
      and other members of the Secret Council. The Italian Raselli was there too, but, subtler than
      his French confreres, he divined the fate of the Communists, and glided from it—safe now in
      his native land, destined there, no doubt, to the funereal honours and lasting renown which
      Italy bestows on the dust of her sons who have advocated assassination out of love for the
      human race.
Amid this group, too, was a National Guard, strayed from his proper post, and stretched on
      the frozen ground; and, early though the hour, in the profound sleep of intoxication.
“So,” said Loubinsky, “you have found your errand in vain, Citizen le Noy; another victim to
      the imbecility of our generals.”
“And partly one of us,” replied the Medecin des Pauvres. “You remember poor le Roux, who
      kept the old baraque where the Council of Ten used to meet? Yonder he lies.”
“Don’t talk of the Council of Ten. What fools and dupes we were made by that vieux gredin,
      Jean Lebeau! How I wish I could meet him again!”
Gaspard le Noy smiled sarcastically. “So much the worse for you, if you did. A muscular and
      a ruthless fellow is that Jean Lebeau!” Therewith he turned to the drunken sleeper and woke
      him up with a shake and a kick. “Armand—Armand Monnier, I say, rise, rub your eyes. What if
      you are called to your post? What if you are shamed as a deserter and a coward?”
Armand turned, rose with an effort from the recumbent to the sitting posture, and stared
      dizzily in the face of the Medecin des Pauvres.
“I was dreaming that I had caught by the throat,” said Armand, wildly, “the aristo who shot
      my brother; and lo, there were two men, Victor de Mauleon and Jean Lebeau.”
“Ah! there is something in dreams,” said the surgeon. “Once in a thousand times a dream
      comes true.”
