
CHAPTER VIII.
No further conversation in the way of sustained dialogue took place that evening between
      Graham and Isaura.
The Americans and the Savarins clustered round Isaura when they quitted the
      refreshment-room. The party was breaking up. Vane would have offered his arm again to Isaura,
      but M. Savarin had forestalled him. The American was despatched by his wife to see for the
      carriage; and Mrs. Morley said, with her wonted sprightly tone of command,
“Now, Mr. Vane, you have no option but to take care of me to the shawl-room.”
Madame Savarin and Signora Venosta had each found their cavaliers, the Italian still
      retaining hold of the portly connoisseur, and the Frenchwoman accepting the safeguard of the
      Vicomte de Breze. As they descended the stairs, Mrs. Morley asked Graham what he thought of
      the young lady to whom she had presented him.
“I think she is charming,” answered Graham.
“Of course; that is the stereotyped answer to all such questions, especially by you
      Englishmen. In public or in private, England is the mouthpiece of platitudes.”
“It is natural for an American to think so. Every child that has just learned to speak uses
      bolder expressions than its grandmamma; but I am rather at a loss to know by what novelty of
      phrase an American would have answered your question.”
“An American would have discovered that Isaura Cicogna had a soul, and his answer would have
      confessed it.”
“It strikes me that he would then have uttered a platitude more stolid than mine. Every
      Christian knows that the dullest human being has a soul. But, to speak frankly, I grant that
      my answer did not do justice to the Signorina, nor to the impression she makes on me; and
      putting aside the charm of the face, there is a charm in a mind that seems to have gathered
      stores of reflection which I should scarcely have expected to find in a young lady brought up
      to be a professional singer.”
“You add prejudice to platitude, and are horribly prosaic to-night; but here we are in the
      shawl-room. I must take another opportunity of attacking you. Pray dine with us tomorrow; you
      will meet our Minister and a few other pleasant friends.”
“I suppose I must not say, ‘I shall be charmed,’” answered Vane; “but I shall be.”
“Bon Dieu! that horrid fat man has deserted Signora Venosta,—looking for his own cloak, I
      dare say; selfish monster! Go and hand her to her carriage; quick, it is announced!”
Graham, thus ordered, hastened to offer his arm to the she-mountebank. Somehow she had
      acquired dignity in his eyes, and he did not feel the least ashamed of being in contact with
      the scarlet jacket.
The Signora grappled to him with a confiding familiarity. “I am afraid,” she said in
      Italian, as they passed along the spacious hall to the porte cochere,—“I am afraid that I did
      not make a good effect to-night. I was nervous; did not you perceive it?”
“No, indeed; you enchanted us all;” replied the dissimulator.
“How amiable you are to say so! You must think that I sought for a compliment. So I did; you
      gave me more than I deserved. Wine is the milk of old men, and praise of old women; but an old
      man may be killed by too much wine, and an old woman lives all the longer for too much praise.
      Buona notte.”
Here she sprang, lithesomely enough, into the carriage, and Isaura followed, escorted by M.
      Savarin. As the two men returned towards the shawl-room, the Frenchman said, “Madame Savarin
      and I complain that you have not let us see so much of you as we ought. No doubt you are
      greatly sought after; but are you free to take your soup with us the day after to-morrow? You
      will meet the Count von Rudesheim, and a few others more lively if less wise.”
“The day after to-morrow I will mark with a white stone. To dine with M. Savarin is an event
      to a man who covets distinction.”
“Such compliments reconcile an author to his trade. You deserve the best return I can make
      you. You will meet la belle Isaura. I have just engaged her and her chaperon. She is a girl of
      true genius; and genius is like those objects of virtu which belong to a former age, and
      become every day more scarce and more precious.”
Here they encountered Colonel Morley and his wife hurrying to their carriage. The American
      stopped Vane, and whispered, “I am glad, sir, to hear from my wife that you dine with us
      to-morrow. Sir, you will meet Mademoiselle Cicogna, and I am not without a kinkle [notion]
      that you will be enthused.”
“This seems like a fatality,” soliloquized Vane as he walked through the deserted streets
      towards his lodging. “I strove to banish that haunting face from my mind. I had half forgotten
      it, and now—” Here his murmur sank into silence. He was deliberating in very conflicted
      thought whether or not he should write to refuse the two invitations he had accepted.
“Pooh!” he said at last, as he reached the door of his lodging, “is my reason so weak that
      it should be influenced by a mere superstition? Surely I know myself too well, and have tried
      myself too long, to fear that I should be untrue to the duty and ends of my life, even if I
      found my heart in danger of suffering.”
Certainly the Fates do seem to mock our resolves to keep our feet from their ambush, and our
      hearts from their snare! How our lives may be coloured by that which seems to us the most
      trivial accident, the merest chance! Suppose that Alain de Rochebriant had been invited to
      that reunion at M. Louvier’s, and Graham Vane had accepted some other invitation and passed
      his evening elsewhere, Alain would probably have been presented to Isaura—what then might have
      happened? The impression Isaura had already made upon the young Frenchman was not so deep as
      that made upon Graham; but then, Alain’s resolution to efface it was but commenced that day,
      and by no means yet confirmed. And if he had been the first clever young man to talk earnestly
      to that clever young girl, who can guess what impression he might have made upon her? His
      conversation might have had less philosophy and strong sense than Graham’s, but more of poetic
      sentiment and fascinating romance.
However, the history of events that do not come to pass is not in the chronicle of the
      Fates.
