
V
And he was at last in the city of the unending murmuring streets, a part of the stirring
     shadow, of the amber-lighted gloom.
It seemed a long time since he had knelt before his sweetheart in the lane, the moon-fire
     streaming upon them from the dark circle of the fort, the air and the light and his soul full
     of haunting, the touch of the unimaginable thrilling his heart; and now he sat in a terrible
     "bed-sitting-room" in a western suburb, confronted by a heap and litter of papers on the desk
     of a battered old bureau.
He had put his breakfast-tray out on the landing, and was thinking of the morning's work, and
     of some very dubious pages that he had blackened the night before. But when he had lit his
     disreputable briar, he remembered there was an unopened letter waiting for him on the table; he
     had recognized the vague, staggering script of Miss Deacon, his cousin. There was not much
     news; his father was "just the same as usual," there had been a good deal of rain, the farmers
     expected to make a lot of cider, and so forth. But at the close of the letter Miss Deacon
     became useful for reproof and admonition.
"I was at Caermaen on Tuesday," she said, "and called on the Gervases and the Dixons. Mr.
     Gervase smiled when I told him you were a literary man, living in London, and said he was
     afraid you wouldn't find it a very practical career. Mrs. Gervase was very proud of Henry's
     success; he passed fifth for some examination, and will begin with nearly four hundred a year.
     I don't wonder the Gervases are delighted. Then I went to the Dixons, and had tea. Mrs. Dixon
     wanted to know if you had published anything yet, and I said I thought not. She showed me a
     book everybody is talking about, called the Dog and the Doctor. She says it's selling
     by thousands, and that one can't take up a paper without seeing the author's name. She told me
     to tell you that you ought to try to write something like it. Then Mr. Dixon came in from the
     study, and your name was mentioned again. He said he was afraid you had made rather a mistake
     in trying to take up literature as if it were a profession, and seemed to think that a place in
     a house of business would be more suitable and more practical. He pointed out that you
     had not had the advantages of a university training, and said that you would find men who had
     made good friends, and had the tone of the university, would be before you at every
     step. He said Edward was doing very well at Oxford. He writes to them that he knows several
     noblemen, and that young Philip Bullingham (son of Sir John Bullingham) is his most intimate
     friend; of course this is very satisfactory for the Dixons. I am afraid, my dear
     Lucian, you have rather overrated your powers. Wouldn't it be better, even now, to look out for
     some real work to do, instead of wasting your time over those silly old books? I know
     quite well how the Gervases and the Dixons feel; they think idleness so injurious for a young
     man, and likely to lead to bad habits. You know, my dear Lucian, I am only writing
     like this because of my affection for you, so I am sure, my dear boy, you won't be
     offended."
Lucian pigeon-holed the letter solemnly in the receptacle lettered "Barbarians." He felt that
     he ought to ask himself some serious questions: "Why haven't I passed fifth? why isn't Philip
     (son of Sir John) my most intimate friend? why am I an idler, liable to fall into bad habits?"
     but he was eager to get to his work, a curious and intricate piece of analysis. So the battered
     bureau, the litter of papers, and the thick fume of his pipe, engulfed him and absorbed him for
     the rest of the morning. Outside were the dim October mists, the dreary and languid life of a
     side street, and beyond, on the main road, the hum and jangle of the gliding trains. But he
     heard none of the uneasy noises of the quarter, not even the shriek of the garden gates nor the
     yelp of the butcher on his round, for delight in his great task made him unconscious of the
     world outside.
He had come by curious paths to this calm hermitage between Shepherd's Bush and Acton Vale.
     The golden weeks of the summer passed on in their enchanted procession, and Annie had not
     returned, neither had she written. Lucian, on his side, sat apart, wondering why his longing
     for her were not sharper. As he though of his raptures he would smile faintly to himself, and
     wonder whether he had not lost the world and Annie with it. In the garden of Avallaunius his
     sense of external things had grown dim and indistinct; the actual, material life seemed every
     day to become a show, a fleeting of shadows across a great white light. At last the news came
     that Annie Morgan had been married from her sister's house to a young farmer, to whom it
     appeared, she had been long engaged, and Lucian was ashamed to find himself only conscious of
     amusement, mingled with gratitude. She had been the key that opened the shut palace, and he was
     now secure on the throne of ivory and gold. A few days after he had heard the news he repeated
     the adventure of his boyhood; for the second time he scaled the steep hillside, and penetrated
     the matted brake. He expected violent disillusion, but his feeling was rather astonishment at
     the activity of boyish imagination. There was no terror nor amazement now in the green
     bulwarks, and the stunted undergrowth did not seem in any way extraordinary. Yet he did not
     laugh at the memory of his sensations, he was not angry at the cheat. Certainly it had been all
     illusion, all the heats and chills of boyhood, its thoughts of terror were without
     significance. But he recognized that the illusions of the child only differed from those of the
     man in that they were more picturesque; belief in fairies and belief in the Stock Exchange as
     bestowers of happiness were equally vain, but the latter form of faith was ugly as well as
     inept. It was better, he knew, and wiser, to wish for a fairy coach than to cherish longings
     for a well-appointed brougham and liveried servants.
He turned his back on the green walls and the dark oaks without any feeling of regret or
     resentment. After a little while he began to think of his adventures with pleasure; the ladder
     by which he had mounted had disappeared, but he was safe on the height. By the chance fancy of
     a beautiful girl he had been redeemed from a world of misery and torture, the world of external
     things into which he had come a stranger, by which he had been tormented. He looked back at a
     kind of vision of himself seen as he was a year before, a pitiable creature burning and
     twisting on the hot coals of the pit, crying lamentably to the laughing bystanders for but one
     drop of cold water wherewith to cool his tongue. He confessed to himself, with some contempt,
     that he had been a social being, depending for his happiness on the goodwill of others; he had
     tried hard to write, chiefly, it was true, from love of the art, but a little from a social
     motive. He had imagined that a written book and the praise of responsible journals would ensure
     him the respect of the county people. It was a quaint idea, and he saw the lamentable fallacies
     naked; in the first place, a painstaking artist in words was not respected by the respectable;
     secondly, books should not be written with the object of gaining the goodwill of the landed and
     commercial interests; thirdly and chiefly, no man should in any way depend on another.
From this utter darkness, from danger of madness, the ever dear and sweet Annie had rescued
     him. Very beautifully and fitly, as Lucian thought, she had done her work without any desire to
     benefit him, she had simply willed to gratify her own passion, and in doing this had handed to
     him the priceless secret. And he, on his side, had reversed the process; merely to make himself
     a splendid offering for the acceptance of his sweetheart, he had cast aside the vain world, and
     had found the truth, which now remained with him, precious and enduring.
And since the news of the marriage he found that his worship of her had by no means vanished;
     rather in his heart was the eternal treasure of a happy love, untarnished and spotless; it
     would be like a mirror of gold without alloy, bright and lustrous for ever. For Lucian, it was
     no defect in the woman that she was desirous and faithless; he had not conceived an affection
     for certain moral or intellectual accidents, but for the very woman. Guided by the self-evident
     axiom that humanity is to be judged by literature, and not literature by humanity, he detected
     the analogy between Lycidas and Annie. Only the dullard would object to the nauseous
     cant of the one, or to the indiscretions of the other. A sober critic might say that the man
     who could generalize Herbert and Laud, Donne and Herrick, Sanderson and Juxon, Hammond and
     Lancelot Andrewes into "our corrupted Clergy" must be either an imbecile or a scoundrel, or
     probably both. The judgment would be perfectly true, but as a criticism of Lycidas it
     would be a piece of folly. In the case of the woman one could imagine the attitude of the
     conventional lover; of the chevalier who, with his tongue in his cheek, "reverences and
     respects" all women, and coming home early in the morning writes a leading article on St
     English Girl. Lucian, on the other hand, felt profoundly grateful to the delicious Annie,
     because she had at precisely the right moment voluntarily removed her image from his way. He
     confessed to himself that, latterly, he had a little dreaded her return as an interruption; he
     had shivered at the thought that their relations would become what was so terribly called an
     "intrigue" or "affair." There would be all the threadbare and common stratagems, the vulgarity
     of secret assignations, and an atmosphere suggesting the period of Mr. Thomas Moore and Lord
     Byron and "segars." Lucian had been afraid of all this; he had feared lest love itself should
     destroy love.
He considered that now, freed from the torment of the body, leaving untasted the green water
     that makes thirst more burning, he was perfectly initiated in the true knowledge of the
     splendid and glorious love. There seemed to him a monstrous paradox in the assertion that there
     could be no true love without a corporal presence of the beloved; even the popular sayings of
     "Absence makes the heart grow fonder," and "familiarity breeds contempt," witnessed to the
     contrary. He thought, sighing, and with compassion, of the manner in which men are continually
     led astray by the cheat of the senses. In order that the unborn might still be added to the
     born, nature had inspired men with the wild delusion that the bodily companionship of the lover
     and the beloved was desirable above all things, and so, by the false show of pleasure, the
     human race was chained to vanity, and doomed to an eternal thirst for the non-existent.
Again and again he gave thanks for his own escape; he had been set free from a life of vice
     and sin and folly, from all the dangers and illusions that are most dreaded by the wise. He
     laughed as he remembered what would be the common view of the situation. An ordinary lover
     would suffer all the sting of sorrow and contempt; there would be grief for a lost mistress,
     and rage at her faithlessness, and hate in the heart; one foolish passion driving on another,
     and driving the man to ruin. For what would be commonly called the real woman he now cared
     nothing; if he had heard that she had died in her farm in Utter Gwent, he would have
     experienced only a passing sorrow, such as he might feel at the death of any one he had once
     known. But he did not think of the young farmer's wife as the real Annie; he did not think of
     the frost-bitten leaves in winter as the real rose. Indeed, the life of many reminded him of
     the flowers; perhaps more especially of those flowers which to all appearance are for many
     years but dull and dusty clumps of green, and suddenly, in one night, burst into the flame of
     blossom, and fill all the misty lawns with odor; till the morning. It was in that night that
     the flower lived, not through the long unprofitable years; and, in like manner, many human
     lives, he thought, were born in the evening and dead before the coming of day. But he had
     preserved the precious flower in all its glory, not suffering it to wither in the hard light,
     but keeping it in a secret place, where it could never be destroyed. Truly now, and for the
     first time, he possessed Annie, as a man possesses the gold which he has dug from the rock and
     purged of its baseness.
He was musing over these things when a piece of news, very strange and unexpected, arrived at
     the rectory. A distant, almost a mythical relative, known from childhood as "Cousin Edward in
     the Isle of Wight," had died, and by some strange freak had left Lucian two thousand pounds. It
     was a pleasure to give his father five hundred pounds, and the rector on his side forgot for a
     couple of days to lean his head on his hand. From the rest of the capital, which was well
     invested, Lucian found he would derive something between sixty and seventy pounds a year, and
     his old desires for literature and a refuge in the murmuring streets returned to him. He longed
     to be free from the incantations that surrounded him in the country, to work and live in a new
     atmosphere; and so, with many good wishes from his father, he came to the retreat in the waste
     places of London.
He was in high spirits when he found the square, clean room, horribly furnished, in the
     by-street that branched from the main road, and advanced in an unlovely sweep to the mud pits
     and the desolation that was neither town nor country. On every side monotonous grey streets,
     each house the replica of its neighbor, to the east an unexplored wilderness, north and west
     and south the brickfields and market-gardens, everywhere the ruins of the country, the tracks
     where sweet lanes had been, gangrened stumps of trees, the relics of hedges, here and there an
     oak stripped of its bark, white and haggard and leprous, like a corpse. And the air seemed
     always grey, and the smoke from the brickfields was grey.
At first he scarcely realized the quarter into which chance had led him. His only thought was
     of the great adventure of letters in which he proposed to engage, and his first glance round
     his "bed-sitting-room" showed him that there was no piece of furniture suitable for his
     purpose. The table, like the rest of the suite, was of bird's-eye maple; but the maker seemed
     to have penetrated the druidic secret of the rocking-stone, the thing was in a state of
     unstable equilibrium perpetually. For some days he wandered through the streets, inspecting the
     second-hand furniture shops, and at last, in a forlorn byway, found an old Japanese bureau,
     dishonored and forlorn, standing amongst rusty bedsteads, sorry china, and all the refuse of
     homes dead and desolate. The bureau pleased him in spite of its grime and grease and dirt.
     Inlaid mother-of-pearl, the gleam of lacquer dragons in red gold, and hints of curious design
     shone through the film of neglect and ill-usage, and when the woman of the shop showed him the
     drawers and well and pigeon-holes, he saw that it would be an apt instrument for his
     studies.
The bureau was carried to his room and replaced the "bird's-eye" table under the gas-jet. As
     Lucian arranged what papers he had accumulated: the sketches of hopeless experiments, shreds
     and tatters of stories begun but never completed, outlines of plots, two or three notebooks
     scribbled through and through with impressions of the abandoned hills, he felt a thrill of
     exaltation at the prospect of work to be accomplished, of a new world all open before him.
He set out on the adventure with a fury of enthusiasm; his last thought at night when all the
     maze of streets was empty and silent was of the problem, and his dreams ran on phrases, and
     when he awoke in the morning he was eager to get back to his desk. He immersed himself in a
     minute, almost a microscopic analysis of fine literature. It was no longer enough, as in the
     old days, to feel the charm and incantation of a line or a word; he wished to penetrate the
     secret, to understand something of the wonderful suggestion, all apart from the sense, that
     seemed to him the differentia of literature, as distinguished from the long follies of
     "character-drawing," "psychological analysis," and all the stuff that went to make the
     three-volume novel of commerce.
He found himself curiously strengthened by the change from the hills to the streets. There
     could be no doubt, he thought, that living a lonely life, interested only in himself and his
     own thoughts, he had become in a measure inhuman. The form of external things, black depths in
     woods, pools in lonely places, those still valleys curtained by hills on every side, sounding
     always with the ripple of their brooks, had become to him an influence like that of a drug,
     giving a certain peculiar color and outline to his thoughts. And from early boyhood there had
     been another strange flavor in his life, the dream of the old Roman world, those curious
     impressions that he had gathered from the white walls of Caermaen, and from the looming
     bastions of the fort. It was in reality the subconscious fancies of many years that had rebuilt
     the golden city, and had shown him the vine-trellis and the marbles and the sunlight in the
     garden of Avallaunius. And the rapture of love had made it all so vivid and warm with life,
     that even now, when he let his pen drop, the rich noise of the tavern and the chant of the
     theatre sounded above the murmur of the streets. Looking back, it was as much a part of his
     life as his schooldays, and the tessellated pavements were as real as the square of faded
     carpet beneath his feet.
But he felt that he had escaped. He could now survey those splendid and lovely visions from
     without, as if he read of opium dreams, and he no longer dreaded a weird suggestion that had
     once beset him, that his very soul was being molded into the hills, and passing into the black
     mirror of still waterpools. He had taken refuge in the streets, in the harbor of a modern
     suburb, from the vague, dreaded magic that had charmed his life. Whenever he felt inclined to
     listen to the old wood-whisper or to the singing of the fauns he bent more earnestly to his
     work, turning a deaf ear to the incantations.
In the curious labor of the bureau he found refreshment that was continually renewed. He
     experienced again, and with a far more violent impulse, the enthusiasm that had attended the
     writing of his book a year or two before, and so, perhaps, passed from one drug to another. It
     was, indeed, with something of rapture that he imagined the great procession of years all to be
     devoted to the intimate analysis of words, to the construction of the sentence, as if it were a
     piece of jewelry or mosaic.
Sometimes, in the pauses of the work, he would pace up and down his cell, looking out of the
     window now and again and gazing for an instant into the melancholy street. As the year advanced
     the days grew more and more misty, and he found himself the inhabitant of a little island
     wreathed about with the waves of a white and solemn sea. In the afternoon the fog would grow
     denser, shutting out not only sight but sound; the shriek of the garden gates, the jangling of
     the tram-bell echoed as if from a far way. Then there were days of heavy incessant rain; he
     could see a grey drifting sky and the drops plashing in the street, and the houses all dripping
     and saddened with wet.
He cured himself of one great aversion. He was no longer nauseated at the sight of a story
     begun and left unfinished. Formerly, even when an idea rose in his mind bright and wonderful,
     he had always approached the paper with a feeling of sickness and dislike, remembering all the
     hopeless beginnings he had made. But now he understood that to begin a romance was almost a
     separate and special art, a thing apart from the story, to be practiced with sedulous care.
     Whenever an opening scene occurred to him he noted it roughly in a book, and he devoted many
     long winter evenings to the elaboration of these beginnings. Sometimes the first impression
     would yield only a paragraph or a sentence, and once or twice but a splendid and sonorous word,
     which seemed to Lucian all dim and rich with unsurmised adventure. But often he was able to
     write three or four vivid pages, studying above all things the hint and significance of the
     words and actions, striving to work into the lines the atmosphere of expectation and promise,
     and the murmur of wonderful events to come.
In this one department of his task the labor seemed almost endless. He would finish a few
     pages and then rewrite them, using the same incident and nearly the same words, but altering
     that indefinite something which is scarcely so much style as manner, or atmosphere. He was
     astonished at the enormous change that was thus effected, and often, though he himself had done
     the work, he could scarcely describe in words how it was done. But it was clear that in this
     art of manner, or suggestion, lay all the chief secrets of literature, that by it all the great
     miracles were performed. Clearly it was not style, for style in itself was untranslatable, but
     it was that high theurgic magic that made the English Don Quixote, roughly traduced by
     some Jervas, perhaps the best of all English books. And it was the same element that made the
     journey of Roderick Random to London, so ostensibly a narrative of coarse jokes and common
     experiences and burlesque manners, told in no very choice diction, essentially a wonderful
     vision of the eighteenth century, carrying to one's very nostrils the aroma of the Great North
     Road, iron-bound under black frost, darkened beneath shuddering woods, haunted by highwaymen,
     with an adventure waiting beyond every turn, and great old echoing inns in the midst of lonely
     winter lands.
It was this magic that Lucian sought for his opening chapters; he tried to find that quality
     that gives to words something beyond their sound and beyond their meaning, that in the first
     lines of a book should whisper things unintelligible but all significant. Often he worked for
     many hours without success, and the grim wet dawn once found him still searching for
     hieroglyphic sentences, for words mystical, symbolic. On the shelves, in the upper part of his
     bureau, he had placed the books which, however various as to matter, seemed to have a part in
     this curious quality of suggestion, and in that sphere which might almost be called
     supernatural. To these books he often had recourse, when further effort appeared altogether
     hopeless, and certain pages in Coleridge and Edgar Allan Poe had the power of holding him in a
     trance of delight, subject to emotions and impressions which he knew to transcend altogether
     the realm of the formal understanding. Such lines as:
    Bottomless vales and boundless floods,   And chasms, and caves, and Titan woods,     With
     forms that no man can discover   For the dews that drip all over; 
had for Lucian more than the potency of a drug, lulling him into a splendid waking-sleep,
     every word being a supreme incantation. And it was not only his mind that was charmed by such
     passages, for he felt at the same time a strange and delicious bodily languor that held him
     motionless, without the desire or power to stir from his seat. And there were certain phrases
     in Kubla Khan that had such a magic that he would sometimes wake up, as it were, to
     the consciousness that he had been lying on the bed or sitting in the chair by the bureau,
     repeating a single line over and over again for two or three hours. Yet he knew perfectly well
     that he had not been really asleep; a little effort recalled a constant impression of the
     wall-paper, with its pink flowers on a buff ground, and of the muslin-curtained window, letting
     in the grey winter light. He had been some seven months in London when this odd experience
     first occurred to him. The day opened dreary and cold and clear, with a gusty and restless wind
     whirling round the corner of the street, and lifting the dead leaves and scraps of paper that
     littered the roadway into eddying mounting circles, as if a storm of black rain were to come.
     Lucian had sat late the night before, and rose in the morning feeling weary and listless and
     heavy-headed. While he dressed, his legs dragged him as with weights, and he staggered and
     nearly fell in bending down to the mat outside for his tea-tray. He lit the spirit lamp on the
     hearth with shaking, unsteady hands, and could scarcely pour out the tea when it was ready. A
     delicate cup of tea was one of his few luxuries; he was fond of the strange flavor of the green
     leaf, and this morning he drank the straw-colored liquid eagerly, hoping it would disperse the
     cloud of languor. He tried his best to coerce himself into the sense of vigor and enjoyment
     with which he usually began the day, walking briskly up and down and arranging his papers in
     order. But he could not free himself from depression; even as he opened the dear bureau a wave
     of melancholy came upon him, and he began to ask himself whether he were not pursuing a vain
     dream, searching for treasures that had no existence. He drew out his cousin's letter and read
     it again, sadly enough. After all there was a good deal of truth in what she said; he had
     "overrated" his powers, he had no friends, no real education. He began to count up the months
     since he had come to London; he had received his two thousand pounds in March, and in May he
     had said good-bye to the woods and to the dear and friendly paths. May, June, July, August,
     September, October, November, and half of December had gone by; and what had he to show?
     Nothing but the experiment, the attempt, futile scribblings which had no end nor shining
     purpose. There was nothing in his desk that he could produce as evidence of his capacity, no
     fragment even of accomplishment. It was a thought of intense bitterness, but it seemed as if
     the barbarians were in the rightâ€”a place in a house of business would have been more
     suitable. He leaned his head on his desk overwhelmed with the severity of his own judgment. He
     tried to comfort himself again by the thought of all the hours of happy enthusiasm he had spent
     amongst his papers, working for a great idea with infinite patience. He recalled to mind
     something that he had always tried to keep in the background of his hopes, the foundation-stone
     of his life, which he had hidden out of sight. Deep in his heart was the hope that he might one
     day write a valiant book; he scarcely dared to entertain the aspiration, he felt his incapacity
     too deeply, but yet this longing was the foundation of all his painful and patient effort. This
     he had proposed in secret to himself, that if he labored without ceasing, without tiring, he
     might produce something which would at all events be art, which would stand wholly apart from
     the objects shaped like books, printed with printers' ink, and called by the name of books that
     he had read. Giotto, he knew, was a painter, and the man who imitated walnut-wood on the deal
     doors opposite was a painter, and he had wished to be a very humble pupil in the class of the
     former. It was better, he thought, to fail in attempting exquisite things than to succeed in
     the department of the utterly contemptible; he had vowed he would be the dunce of Cervantes's
     school rather than top-boy in the academy of A Bad Un to Beat and Millicent's
      Marriage. And with this purpose he had devoted himself to laborious and joyous years, so
     that however mean his capacity, the pains should not be wanting. He tried now to rouse himself
     from a growing misery by the recollection of this high aim, but it all seemed hopeless vanity.
     He looked out into the grey street, and it stood a symbol of his life, chill and dreary and
     grey and vexed with a horrible wind. There were the dull inhabitants of the quarter going about
     their common business; a man was crying "mackerel" in a doleful voice, slowly passing up the
     street, and staring into the white-curtained "parlors," searching for the face of a purchaser
     behind the India-rubber plants, stuffed birds, and piles of gaudy gilt books that adorned the
     windows. One of the blistered doors over the way banged, and a woman came scurrying out on some
     errand, and the garden gate shrieked two melancholy notes as she opened it and let it swing
     back after her. The little patches called gardens were mostly untilled, uncared for, squares of
     slimy moss, dotted with clumps of coarse ugly grass, but here and there were the blackened and
     rotting remains of sunflowers and marigolds. And beyond, he knew, stretched the labyrinth of
     streets more or less squalid, but all grey and dull, and behind were the mud pits and the
     steaming heaps of yellowish bricks, and to the north was a great wide cold waste, treeless,
     desolate, swept by bitter wind. It was all like his own life, he said again to himself, a maze
     of unprofitable dreariness and desolation, and his mind grew as black and hopeless as the
     winter sky. The morning went thus dismally till twelve o'clock, and he put on his hat and
     great-coat. He always went out for an hour every day between twelve and one; the exercise was a
     necessity, and the landlady made his bed in the interval. The wind blew the smoke from the
     chimneys into his face as he shut the door, and with the acrid smoke came the prevailing odor
     of the street, a blend of cabbage-water and burnt bones and the faint sickly vapor from the
     brickfields. Lucian walked mechanically for the hour, going eastward, along the main road. The
     wind pierced him, and the dust was blinding, and the dreariness of the street increased his
     misery. The row of common shops, full of common things, the blatant public-houses, the
     Independent chapel, a horrible stucco parody of a Greek temple with a façade of hideous columns
     that was a nightmare, villas like smug Pharisees, shops again, a church in cheap Gothic, an old
     garden blasted and riven by the builder, these were the pictures of the way. When he got home
     again he flung himself on the bed, and lay there stupidly till sheer hunger roused him. He ate
     a hunch of bread and drank some water, and began to pace up and down the room, wondering
     whether there were no escape from despair. Writing seemed quite impossible, and hardly knowing
     what he did he opened his bureau and took out a book from the shelves. As his eyes fell on the
     page the air grew dark and heavy as night, and the wind wailed suddenly, loudly, terribly.
"By woman wailing for her Demon lover." The words were on his lips when he raised his eyes
     again. A broad band of pale clear light was shining into the room, and when he looked out of
     the window he saw the road all brightened by glittering pools of water, and as the last drops
     of the rain-storm starred these mirrors the sun sank into the wrack. Lucian gazed about him,
     perplexed, till his eyes fell on the clock above his empty hearth. He had been sitting,
     motionless, for nearly two hours without any sense of the passage of time, and without ceasing
     he had murmured those words as he dreamed an endless wonderful story. He experienced somewhat
     the sensations of Coleridge himself; strange, amazing, ineffable things seemed to have been
     presented to him, not in the form of the idea, but actually and materially, but he was less
     fortunate than Coleridge in that he could not, even vaguely, image to himself what he had seen.
     Yet when he searched his mind he knew that the consciousness of the room in which he sat had
     never left him; he had seen the thick darkness gather, and had heard the whirl of rain hissing
     through the air. Windows had been shut down with a crash, he had noted the pattering footsteps
     of people running to shelter, the landlady's voice crying to some one to look at the rain
     coming in under the door. It was like peering into some old bituminous picture, one could see
     at last that the mere blackness resolved itself into the likeness of trees and rocks and
     travelers. And against this background of his room, and the storm, and the noises of the
     street, his vision stood out illuminated, he felt he had descended to the very depths, into the
     caverns that are hollowed beneath the soul. He tried vainly to record the history of his
     impressions; the symbols remained in his memory, but the meaning was all conjecture.
The next morning, when he awoke, he could scarcely understand or realize the bitter
     depression of the preceding day. He found it had all vanished away and had been succeeded by an
     intense exaltation. Afterwards, when at rare intervals he experienced the same strange
     possession of the consciousness, he found this to be the invariable result, the hour of vision
     was always succeeded by a feeling of delight, by sensations of brightened and intensified
     powers. On that bright December day after the storm he rose joyously, and set about the labor
     of the bureau with the assurance of success, almost with the hope of formidable difficulties to
     be overcome. He had long busied himself with those curious researches which Poe had indicated
     in the Philosophy of Composition, and many hours had been spent in analyzing the
     singular effects which may be produced by the sound and resonance of words. But he had been
     struck by the thought that in the finest literature there were more subtle tones than the loud
     and insistent music of "never more," and he endeavored to find the secret of those pages and
     sentences which spoke, less directly, and less obviously, to the soul rather than to the ear,
     being filled with a certain grave melody and the sensation of singing voices. It was admirable,
     no doubt, to write phrases that showed at a glance their designed rhythm, and rang with
     sonorous words, but he dreamed of a prose in which the music should be less explicit, of names
     rather than notes. He was astonished that morning at his own fortune and facility; he succeeded
     in covering a page of ruled paper wholly to his satisfaction, and the sentences, when he read
     them out, appeared to suggest a weird elusive chanting, exquisite but almost imperceptible,
     like the echo of the plainsong reverberated from the vault of a monastic church.
He thought that such happy mornings well repaid him for the anguish of depression which he
     sometimes had to suffer, and for the strange experience of "possession" recurring at rare
     intervals, and usually after many weeks of severe diet. His income, he found, amounted to
     sixty-five pounds a year, and he lived for weeks at a time on fifteen shillings a week. During
     these austere periods his only food was bread, at the rate of a loaf a day; but he drank huge
     draughts of green tea, and smoked a black tobacco, which seemed to him a more potent mother of
     thought than any drug from the scented East. "I hope you go to some nice place for dinner,"
     wrote his cousin; "there used to be some excellent eating-houses in London where one could get
     a good cut from the joint, with plenty of gravy, and a boiled potato, for a shilling.
     Aunt Mary writes that you should try Mr. Jones's in Water Street, Islington, whose father came
     from near Caermaen, and was always most comfortable in her day. I daresay the walk there would
     do you good. It is such a pity you smoke that horrid tobacco. I had a letter from Mrs. Dolly
     (Jane Diggs, who married your cousin John Dolly) the other day, and she said they would have
     been delighted to take you for only twenty-five shillings a week for the sake of the family if
     you had not been a smoker. She told me to ask you if you had ever seen a horse or a dog smoking
     tobacco. They are such nice, comfortable people, and the children would have been company for
     you. Johnnie, who used to be such a dear little fellow, has just gone into an office in the
     City, and seems to have excellent prospects. How I wish, my dear Lucian, that you could do
     something in the same way. Don't forget Mr. Jones's in Water Street, and you might mention your
     name to him."
Lucian never troubled Mr. Jones; but these letters of his cousin's always refreshed him by
     the force of contrast. He tried to imagine himself a part of the Dolly family, going dutifully
     every morning to the City on the bus, and returning in the evening for high tea. He could
     conceive the fine odor of hot roast beef hanging about the decorous house on Sunday afternoons,
     papa asleep in the dining-room, mamma lying down, and the children quite good and happy with
     their "Sundays books." In the evening, after supper, one read the Quiver till bedtime.
     Such pictures as these were to Lucian a comfort and a help, a remedy against despair. Often
     when he felt overwhelmed by the difficulty of the work he had undertaken, he thought of the
     alternative career, and was strengthened.
He returned again and again to that desire of a prose which should sound faintly, not so much
     with an audible music, but with the memory and echo of it. In the night, when the last tram had
     gone jangling by, and he had looked out and seen the street all wrapped about in heavy folds of
     the mist, he conducted some of his most delicate experiments. In that white and solitary
     midnight of the suburban street he experienced the curious sense of being on a tower, remote
     and apart and high above all the troubles of the earth. The gas lamp, which was nearly
     opposite, shone in a pale halo of light, and the houses themselves were merely indistinct marks
     and shadows amidst that palpable whiteness, shutting out the world and its noises. The
     knowledge of the swarming life that was so still, though it surrounded him, made the silence
     seem deeper than that of the mountains before the dawn; it was as if he alone stirred and
     looked out amidst a host sleeping at his feet. The fog came in by the open window in freezing
     puffs, and as Lucian watched he noticed that it shook and wavered like the sea, tossing up
     wreaths and drifts across the pale halo of the lamp, and, these vanishing, others succeeded. It
     was as if the mist passed by from the river to the north, as if it still passed by in the
     silence.
He would shut his window gently, and sit down in his lighted room with all the consciousness
     of the white advancing shroud upon him. It was then that he found himself in the mood for
     curious labors, and able to handle with some touch of confidence the more exquisite instruments
     of the craft. He sought for that magic by which all the glory and glamour of mystic chivalry
     were made to shine through the burlesque and gross adventures of Don Quixote, by which
     Hawthorne had lit his infernal Sabbath fires, and fashioned a burning aureole about the village
     tragedy of the Scarlet Letter. In Hawthorne the story and the suggestion, though quite
     distinct and of different worlds, were rather parallel than opposed to one another; but
     Cervantes had done a stranger thing. One read of Don Quixote, beaten, dirty, and ridiculous,
     mistaking windmills for giants, sheep for an army; but the impression was of the enchanted
     forest, of Avalon, of the San Graal, "far in the spiritual city." And Rabelais showed him,
     beneath the letter, the Tourainian sun shining on the hot rock above Chinon, on the maze of
     narrow, climbing streets, on the high-pitched, gabled roofs, on the grey-blue
      tourelles, pricking upward from the fantastic labyrinth of walls. He heard the sound
     of sonorous plain-song from the monastic choir, of gross exuberant gaiety from the rich
     vineyards; he listened to the eternal mystic mirth of those that halted in the purple shadow of
     the sorbier by the white, steep road. The gracious and ornate châteaux on the
     Loire and the Vienne rose fair and shining to confront the incredible secrets of vast, dim,
     far-lifted Gothic naves, that seemed ready to take the great deep, and float away from the mist
     and dust of earthly streets to anchor in the haven of the clear city that hath foundations. The
     rank tale of the garderobe, of the farm-kitchen, mingled with the reasoned, endless
     legend of the schools, with luminous Platonic argument; the old pomp of the Middle Ages put on
     the robe of a fresh life. There was a smell of wine and of incense, of June meadows and of
     ancient books, and through it all he hearkened, intent, to the exultation of chiming bells
     ringing for a new feast in a new land. He would cover pages with the analysis of these marvels,
     tracking the suggestion concealed beneath the words, and yet glowing like the golden threads in
     a robe of samite, or like that device of the old binders by which a vivid picture appeared on
     the shut edges of a book. He tried to imitate this art, to summon even the faint shadow of the
     great effect, rewriting a page of Hawthorne, experimenting and changing an epithet here and
     there, noting how sometimes the alteration of a trifling word would plunge a whole scene into
     darkness, as if one of those blood-red fires had instantly been extinguished. Sometimes, for
     severe practice, he attempted to construct short tales in the manner of this or that master. He
     sighed over these desperate attempts, over the clattering pieces of mechanism which would not
     even simulate life; but he urged himself to an infinite perseverance. Through the white hours
     he worked on amidst the heap and litter of papers; books and manuscripts overflowed from the
     bureau to the floor; and if he looked out he saw the mist still pass by, still passing from the
     river to the north.
It was not till the winter was well advanced that he began at all to explore the region in
     which he lived. Soon after his arrival in the grey street he had taken one or two vague walks,
     hardly noticing where he went or what he saw; but for all the summer he had shut himself in his
     room, beholding nothing but the form and color of words. For his morning walk he almost
     invariably chose the one direction, going along the Uxbridge Road towards Notting Hill, and
     returning by the same monotonous thoroughfare. Now, however, when the new year was beginning
     its dull days, he began to diverge occasionally to right and left, sometimes eating his
     luncheon in odd corners, in the bulging parlors of eighteenth-century taverns, that still
     fronted the surging sea of modern streets, or perhaps in brand new "publics" on the broken
     borders of the brickfields, smelling of the clay from which they had swollen. He found waste
     by-places behind railway embankments where he could smoke his pipe sheltered from the wind;
     sometimes there was a wooden fence by an old pear-orchard where he sat and gazed at the wet
     desolation of the market-gardens, munching a few currant biscuits by way of dinner. As he went
     farther afield a sense of immensity slowly grew upon him; it was as if, from the little island
     of his room, that one friendly place, he pushed out into the grey unknown, into a city that for
     him was uninhabited as the desert.
He came back to his cell after these purposeless wanderings always with a sense of relief,
     with the thought of taking refuge from grey. As he lit the gas and opened the desk of his
     bureau and saw the pile of papers awaiting him, it was as if he had passed from the black skies
     and the stinging wind and the dull maze of the suburb into all the warmth and sunlight and
     violent color of the south.
