<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The True History of Joshua Davidson : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Linton, Elizabeth Lynn (1822-1898)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1872</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAPTER XI.
I HAVE said so much of the personal charities of Joshua that I seem to have thrown
     into the shade, by comparison, his political life and action; and yet this was the more
     important of the two. The extreme section of republican working men, though they did not go in
     for his religious views, made use of his political zeal; and when work was bad to get,
     sometimes he was sent as a delegate, sometimes he went of his own accord, to the various towns
     that needed either encouragement or awakening; where he gave lectures on the necessity of labour
      keeping a close front against the serried ranks of capital;
     on the lawfulness and desirability of trades' unions and strikes, when occasion demands; on the
     political worth of a republic that grows naturally out of monarchy and oligarch, as manhood
     grows out of childhood; on the need of the working classes raising themselves to a higher level
     in mind and circumstance than that which they occupy now; on the beauty of social and moral
     freedom; and on the right of each man to a fair share of the primary essentials for good
     living. And all this was mixed up with that fervid practical Christianity of his, which gave a
     new and holier aspect to every question he handled.
Joshua believed in the religion of politics. He often said that, were Christ to come
      again in this day, He would be more of a politician than a
     theologian; and that he would teach men to work for the coming of the kingdom of heaven on
     earth, rather through the general elevation of the material condition of the masses than by
     either ritual or dogma.
“You can't make a man a saint in mind,” I have heard him say more than once, “when you keep
     him like a beast in body;” and “higher wages, better food, better lodgment, and better
     education will do more to make men real Christians than all the churches ever built.”
No man was more convinced than he that sin and misery are the removable results of social
     circumstances, and that poverty, ignorance, and class-distinctions consequent, are at the root
     of all the crimes and wretchedness
      ness afloat. The evil lying in that great curse of partial
     civilisation—that upas tree of caste—by which this Christian world of ours, with its religion
     of brotherhood and socialism, is overshadowed, pained him most of all. The caste of the rich,
     with its product, the class antagonism of the poor—what a sorry satire on the religion of Jesus
     of Nazareth, that poor, unlearned man of the people, whom we have exalted into God and now
     worship with gorgeous ceremonial, while despising every one of the social doctrines He and His
     disciples preached! However, Joshua did his best to rouse men to a consciousness of Christ, and
     to the acceptance of His teaching of human equality; and though steadily closed to all
     doctrines of violence, was always the passionate upholder of the doctrine of
      duty on the one side and the theory of rights on the
     other.
He had often a sore time of it. His discourses roused immense antagonism, and he was
     sometimes set upon and severely handled by the men to whom he spoke. I have seen him left for
     dead twice in the rough monarchical towns. But he worked as the Master had worked before him;
     simply changing the methods to be more in harmony with the times; going on his way calm,
     unshaken, cheerful, ever ready to face the worst and take what danger might arise without
     blenching; of a steadfast heart and a loyal spirit; looking up to God, living after Christ, and
     loving the humanity that blackguarded and nearly killed him as his reward. Tears are in my
     eyes, rough man as I am, when I remember Joshua Davidson, his life
      and works, and what the world he lived but to better said of
     him and did to him. I have known swindlers and murderers more gently treated. Of a truth, the
     age of martyrs has not passed away; as any one may prove in his own person who will set himself
     to enlarge the close boroughs of thought, and to rectify the injustice of society.
The war broke out between France and Prussia, and at the first the tide of liberal sympathies
     went with Prussia, as representing opposition to the Empire. But as time went on, sides
     changed, and moderates backed up Prussia, while the ultra-Tories and the Republicans went with
     France; the one hoping to see the Empire restored, the other longing for the establishment of
     liberty. And Joshua's sympathies changed with the
      rest. I ought perhaps to have made more than I have done of
     his intimacy with certain foreign socialists and reformers. Félix Pyat I have already spoken
     of. He was one of our warmest friends; and, to go to a very materialistic part of the subject,
     his association with us both was of great value, not only for the sake of the man himself, but
     also for the opportunity he afforded us of learning the French language.
When the Commune declared itself on the eighteenth of March, none but those in the centre of
     advanced political feeling can tell what passionate hopes were awakened in the men who care for
     liberty and believe in social progress. Comtists, Internationalists, Secularists, Socialists,
     Republicans, by what name soever the doctrine of liberty and brotherhood may be proclaimed, we
     all looked over
      to Paris with an anxiety that was as painful as if we stood
     watching the struggles of a beloved friend with our own hands bound. There were men whom that
     time sent mad with hope and fear; and some that I could name are now lying cold in their graves
     for sorrow at the failure of the righteous cause. The Commune, successful in Paris, meant the
     emancipation of the working classes here, and later on the peaceable establishment of the
     Republic; which we all believe has to come, whether peaceably established or
     not.
On the nineteenth of March, Joshua resolved to go over to Paris, to help, so far as he could,
     in the cause of humanity. I never saw him so full of enthusiasm. Every now and then, especially
     of late, his hope, if not his zeal, had slackened a little before
      the magnitude of the task he had undertaken at home. Alone
     as he was, not only unsupported by any influential men whatsoever, but actively supposed by
     many, he found his work of amelioration very hard, and the results unsatisfactory. But to help
     in the establishment of an organised liberty like the Commune—that seemed the best thing any
     man loving his fellow-men could do; and accordingly, he and I agreed to go over at once. And
     poor Mary Prinsep was broken hearted. But, sorry as he was to give her sorrow, his duty was too
     clear before him to let him hesitate; and, stifling whatever grief of private affection he
     might leave behind him, he set his face toward Paris; and after some difficulties and dangers
     we arrived there, “let into the trap” as so many before and after us.

As this is not a history of the Commune it is not necessary to say much about the leaders.
     Some he loved like his very brothers; others, chiefly of the noisier sort, he distrusted as
     leaders, and would rather have seen subordinate to better-balanced minds. He might not too,
     have always agreed even with the men he loved. Being men, they were fallible; but they did
     honestly for the best, and the abuse hurled at them—a “nest of miscreants,” a “handful of
     brigands,” and the like—was as untrue as it was illogical. There were among the Communist
     leaders men as noble as ever lived upon earth; men, whatever their special creed, the most
     after the pattern of Christ in their faithful endeavour to help the poor and to raise the
     lowly, to rectify the injustice of conventional distinctions, and to give all men an equal
      chance of being happy, virtuous, and human.
Never had Paris been so free from crime as during the administration of the Commune—never so
     pure. All the vice which had disgraced the city ever since the congenial Empire had enlisted,
     was swept clean out of it; and not the most reckless vilifiers of these latter-day Christ-men
     could make out a case of peculation, of greed, or of uncleanness among them. Skilled artisans
     abandoned their lucrative callings for the starvation-pay of a franc and a half a day, and set
     themselves—not to amass wealth, not to gain power, nor to live in luxury and pleasure—but to
     plan for the best for their fellow-men, and to sketch out a future glorious alike for France
     and the whole world. The working man vindicated then his claim to be entrusted
      trusted with his own self-government; and one of the
     brightest pages of modern history, in spite of all its mistakes, is that wherein the artisan
     government of '71 wrote its brief but noble record on the heart of Paris.
The most fatal thing of that time, however, was the unconquerable distrust of the people.
     Long used to tyranny and treachery as they had been, they seemed unable to accept any man as a
     true patriot, not plotting underhand for his own advantage. They trusted no one—not even their
     sworn and tested friends. And we can scarcely wonder at it. Twenty years of Louis Napoleon, the
     military command of Trochu, the history of the past Imperial administration and the present
     Imperial war, had eaten into their very hearts, and taken all the faith out of them. And the
     consequence was, that even the men
      now heading the great liberation movement, the best and most
     unselfish of the “sinless Cains” of history, were suspected by the very city they were
     sacrificing themselves to save.
But Paris was mad—mad with despair, with famine, with shame, disease, excitement. The gaunt
     frames, the hollow cheeks, the wild eyes that met you at every turn, were eloquent witnesses of
     the state of men's minds; and I shall never forget the mournful impression it all made on me.
     No one looked sane, save the leaders, and perhaps a few of us more cool-headed Anglo-Saxons.
     The Poles, who had flocked in to take part in a cause they identified with their own broken
     nationality, added the fever of their political despair to the fire consuming the vitals of the
     Parisians; the Italians poured
      in their bitter hatred to the priests as oil on
     flames—emblems to them of tyranny, treachery, ignorance, and persecution they could not be
     brought to acknowledge even the good that is in them, but were ever their unrelenting enemies;
     the republicans of all nations gathered into the struggling city, each with his own specific
     and his own desires; everywhere was fierce excitement, and the conflict of hope and fear, high
     endeavour and deep despair; while it grew clearer and clearer, as the days passed by, that the
     cause of the freedom of Paris, and with Paris of Europe—the cause of the rights and better
     organisation of labour—was lost for the hour, and that hope only was left for the future. The
     city has overmatched, and liberty was doomed. It was but a question of time; the Commune had to
     die, and
      it resolved to die fighting and unsurrendered.
Of all the Communists, Delescluze was the one Joshua loved most, because he esteemed him
     most; and this, not forgetting his old loyalty and friendship to Félix Pyat, nor denying
     reverence and love to many others. But there was something special in Delescluze. His heroic
     spirit, his martyr's life, his unbroken courage, his unquenchable faith, and that quiet sadness
     which seemed like the sadness of a prophet—all that he was, and had been, raised one's
     admiration more than any other man among them was able to do; and Joshua was one of his chosen
     friends. We were both present at the sitting where he vowed, in answer to a taunt flung like a
     bomb-shell among the members, not to survive the insurrection. The effect was
      electrical; it was like a leaf out of old-world history,
     telling of a time when patriotism was a passion of which men were not ashamed. And when that
     noble old man rose so quietly, so solemnly, with no theatrical display or frothy excitement,
     but calmly registered the vow he afterwards kept with such sublime courage, it was as a torch
     that lighted every heart and soul there with Pentecostal fire. All knew what his words meant;
     and we, who shared his private thoughts and feelings as brothers, knew perhaps more than some
     others. Ah! the Society that needs such victims as Delescluze to bolster up its rottenness had
     better crumble to dust as it stands.
</div></body></text></TEI>