<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The True History of Joshua Davidson : VWWP edition
      </title><author>Linton, Elizabeth Lynn (1822-1898)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1872</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">

CHAPTER VI.
AMONG the rest of the doubtful characters with which our court abounded, was one Joe
     Traill, who had been in prison many a time for petty larceny and the like, but who, the last
     time he was had up, was convicted of burglary. However, he was out now on a ticket-of-leave,
     and fast going the way to get it cancelled, with a new score to the back of it. Respectability
     and the police were bent on elbowing poor Joe into the mire, which was only too much his
     natural element. He had been crotch deep in the mud from the earliest; a gutter child, in whose
      very blood ran the hereditary taint; a thief, the son of
     thieves, the grandson of thieves; a thing of mud from head to heel, inside and out; dirty,
     dissipated, shiftless, and with no more moral principle in him than he had of education. His
     only morality indeed, was his cleverness in being able to break the law without being found
     out; and when he was most down on his luck, he was disposed to think most meanly of
     himself.
He was one of those who stink in the nostrils of cleanly, civilised society, and who are its
     shame and secret sore. And cleanly, civilised society, not being able to make a good job of him
     as he stood, thrust him out of its sight, and tried to forget him behind the prison grating.
     There was no place for Joe in this great world of ours. There was no work for him to do,
     because he could do
      none requiring any of the deftness got by practice; and if
     by chance he got a job anywhere, he lost it mysteriously in a day or so; and, double as he
     might, he found the dogs of detection too sharp for him.
So he said to Joshua one night in his blithe way—poor Joe! he had not fibre enough in him to
     take even his misfortunes seriously!—that there was nothing for him but the old line along with
     his pals, making a running fight of it, now up now down, as his luck went.
“We'll see if something better won't turn up,” said Joshua. “Burglary's a bad trade,
     Joe.”
“Only one I've got at my fingers' ends, governor,” laughed the thief; “and starvation is a
     worse go than quod.”
“Well, till you've learned a better, share
      with us,” said Joshua. “If we have no widow's cruse—”
     “Blowed if I know what that means!” put in Joe, “—we have what does as well,” continued Joshua;
     “and it's better for four to go short than for one to be rationed at the hulks.”
So now our little home circle was increased by one more; and we had added a burglar to the
     prostitute.
“It is what Christ would have done,” said Joshua, when he was remonstrated with. “He lived
     among the lepers whom no man would touch, and whose very presence was pollution. But he healed
     some among them; and so will I these.”
But the police did not see it. They do not understand practical Christianity in
     Scotland-yard, save as a generous kind of fad or pastime in a swell with more money
      than brains, and a lot of idle time on his hands. And then
     they laugh at it behind backs, and ridicule him for being green. But when it came to a poor
     journeyman carpenter housing a jail-bird, and consorting with bad characters daily, they had
     but one conclusion to come to—the carpenter was no better than his company. Wherefore, “from
     information received,” Joshua and I, who had long been looked on askance by our mates as I
     said, were called up before the master, and had our dismissal from the shop. His other men, he
     said, objected to us; and, by the Lord, from all he had been told he did not wonder at it! And
     he gave us a caution—kindly meant, if harshly said—not to keep such company as we did, if we
     wanted to be respected by master or mate, and to remember that “birds of a
      feather flock together,” and if we chose such birds as he
     was told we did, we could look for nothing else than to be classed along, with them. On which
     he paid us our week's wages, and we found ourselves next thing to penniless in the wilds of
     London.
But Joshua was disturbed. He told both Joe and Mary, on the evening, we were discharged, that
     he would not forsake them come what might. It should still be share and share alike; only let
     them be of good courage and a clean conscience, and things would go well. How, nobody knew; but
     this is what he said, and promised.
And Mary, looking up into his face with a look that made her like an angel—for indeed she was
     a pretty girl!—said, “If I have to starve, Joshua, I'll never go back to the streets again!”
     and poor Joe, first
      laughing, and then sobbing like a woman, said, “You'd have
     done better to have left me to my little game, governor! I've brought you bad luck, you see;
     and I'm no good, you see, when you've done your best!”
“Don't carry on like that, Joe,” said Joshua. “I shall have done something, if I save you
     both: and I will.”
I could not help thinking that this “I will,” said with such manly courage, such deep
     religious firmness, was a greater trial of faith than the boyish exaltation in the Rocky Valley
     so many years ago; and that to save from the streets a girl who was not able to do anything,
     else that the world wants, and to put honesty and a clean name into such a poor conscienceless
     waif as Joe, were greater deeds than to cause a stone to
      move out of its place in the Name of the Lord.
And all of us, his old Cornish friends who had come up to be near him, and some new friends
     he had made in London, swore we would never desert him, but would stand by him to the last. For
     we looked that he should do something in his day, as I said before—something to advance the
     world, and towards the solution of the great questions perplexing society at this moment. True,
     we were a poor, moneyless lot—all working men, no science among us, no political power, no
     social status, no political-economy knowledge of the right sort; a handful of enthusiasts set
     out to realise Christ at one time by faith, and now by works. But we had a soul among us—a
     leader in whom we believed; and we trusted in ourselves. And
      one by one we all got to work again somehow, and floated in
     the shallow but sufficient water to which we were accustomed. But it was a hard time; and, bit
     by bit, everything we possessed passed over the pawnbroker's counter, even to our tools. And
     when they went, it seemed as if all hope had gone.
But when we were at the worst, and things looked as though they had given over all thought of
     mending—for we were getting whersh and weak for want of food—Joshua received a letter enclosing
     a five-pound note, “from a friend.” We never knew where it came from, and there was no clue by
     which we could guess. It was very certain that neither had Mary earned it in the old way, nor
     had Joe stolen it; but who sent it remained for ever a mystery. I always thought
      that Mary had had a hand in it, and I think so to this day.
     I believe, though I don't know, that she borrowed it of an artist to whom she went to sit for a
     model; for she did not make any secret of this; and that she paid it back honestly when we were
     in funds again. However that might be, it came at the very nick of time; and immediately after,
     both Joshua and I got the offer of a job at Messrs. — in Curtain-road, which we could not have
     accepted had we not had money wherewith to take our tools out of pawn. It was a sharp pinch
     while it lasted, but, God be praised, it passed without doing real harm to any one. And Joe and
     Mary still bided with us.
By this time Joshua's strange doings in Church-court had got known to some of the gentlemen
     who practise philanthropy. His
      night-school for those who would learn either prayer or
     secular knowledge of him—his charity dinners, when he could get enough money together to give
     them—his goodness to the children, to the lost, to the starving—all this had got wind; and just
     as he wanted help most, the news of his doings brought him the famous Mr. C. anxious to know
     how a man like him could carry on charities, apparently on nothing, which cost himself a large
     income to keep up.
He was a good man, this Mr. C.; up to his lights, none better; but his lights were few and
     feeble, and he drew a line hard and fast where Joshua did not. His line was respectability. He
     distinctly refused to aid those who were hopeless paupers, or those of bad repute. He would
     help respectable poverty, and help it substantially though always
      afraid of overdoing it and inducing a habit of reliance on
     extraneous aid; but beasted, shiftless, drunken poverty—poverty that lied and whined and drank
     gin and got relief from half-a-dozen charities at once—poverty that was its own cause and that
     never stirred a hand to help itself—for this he had no pity, and to it gave no help.
“To encourage pauperism” and “to offer a premium for vice” were the two things of which he
     was most afraid in his dealings with the poor; but he held out a helping hand gladly enough to
     the “deserving” and the “respectable” poor, and he was a warm patron of reformatories, refuges
     for soiled doves, and the like half-punitive places of retreat for sinful flesh, where they
     might repent of their evil past, and be made fit to
      take up a lowly place among the respectable members of
     society once more;—but always, in a sense, a place of humiliation and penitent degradation.
As he came along at this time, and was handy, and as Mary's friend, the artist, had gone to
     Italy for some months, and she had no other patron of the like kind, so was out of work as one
     may say, to him Joshua told the whole story of both her and Joe Traill; also how he had kept
     them in the best way he could from the evil to which society had driven them in former days: he
     did not add the rider of how society had revenged itself on him as on them, and cast us all out
     in company. But now, he said, he was desirous of placing them both where their temptation
      would be towards honesty; where it would be better for them to be
      honest, and where falling back would plunge them into misery
     as well as shame.
Mr. C. listened attentively. He was evidently touched by the high spirit of the man, but he
     greatly questioned the wisdom of his ways. For Joe, he said, he scarcely knew what to propose.
     He shrank from committing himself to the patronage of a convicted thief, who was not a boy to
     be sent to a reformatory and disciplined into good ways. It was out of his line altogether, and
     he had no machinery at hand for him. Had he been a broken-down, sober, honest, and industrious
     chap, who had failed through sickness or any blameless misfortune, he would then have given him
     a lift willingly; but a man who had slipped into the dark ways of crime, who had got into
     houses at dead of night with a crowbar
      bar and a jimmy—he shook his head, and said he did not like
     to have anything to do with him. It was offering a premium to vice to take trouble to place
     this unsatisfactory waif and stray, when hundreds of honest men, who had never gone wrong, were
     perishing for want of aid.
“As for that,” said Joshua, “I ask nothing, whether this man sinned or his parents; or
     neither. He is in want; and, to my way of thinking, his need is his claim, not his
     respectability.”
Mr. C. looked dubious. “We must draw a line,” he said.
“Christ drew it at the Pharisee,” answered Joshua simply.
“To make no difference between vice and virtue—to treat the one as tenderly as the
     other—would soon be to obliterate all
      difference between them in minds as well as in practice,”
     said Mr. C.
“And what, then, do we say to the parable of the men who worked unequally, and who got the
     same wages at the end?” said Joshua.
“My good fellow,” cried Mr. C. a little impatiently, “it would be perfectly impossible to try
     and live strictly after the Bible. ‘Counsels of perfection’ are all very well, but they are
     impracticable for the world as it is.”
“I have to find that out yet,” said Joshua. “Then you will not help me with poor Joe?”
“Do not say I will not—I cannot,” said Mr. C. “How can I ask my poor, honest pensioners, or
     my respectable workmen, to receive a convicted thief among them?”
“‘And forgive us our trespasses, as we
      forgive them that trespass against us.’ Does that mean only
     petty, personal affronts, sir, or does it mean trespass against our patience, our hope, our
     faith, our principles? Does it not mean the everlasting Love, whether we call it charity or
     humanity, by which we would raise the fallen and help the weak?”
“As for that,” retorted Mr. C., “there are texts enough against consorting with evil. You
     cannot touch pitch, Mr. Davidson, without being defiled.”
“Christ lodged in the house of Simon the leper. Mary Magdalene loved Him, and He her. I want
     no other example, sir. What the Master did, His followers and disciples may imitate!”
“You are an enthusiast,” said Mr. C. just as the M.P. had said before him, and
      both meant that enthusiasm was ridiculous; “and some day
     these fine theories of yours will come to a cruel downfall. You will be harbouring some ruffian
     who will turn against you, and perhaps cut your throat for your pains. I tell you I know these
     people—they are incorrigible.”
“Then what would you do with them, Mr. C.?”
“You can do nothing with them!” he answered.
“But they cannot be let to starve,” said Joshua earnestly.
“I do not see that it is any one's duty to feed them, when they will not feed themselves save
     by vice and crime,” answered the philanthropist. “I would make all rogues, male and female,
     show some tangible signs of repentance and good living
      before I would help them or countenance them in any way.
     Believe me, your universal charity is the most disastrous line you could adopt.”
“Then Christ was wrong,” said Joshua: “and so we have come round to our starting-point again.
     So this is decided—you will not give Joe Traill a trial?”
“No; I would rather not have anything to do with him,” said Mr. C., who had talked himself
     cross and determined. “I should never be easy with the fellow. I have no fancy for burglars,
     and I don't believe in their reformation. All my men are picked men; not a loose character
     among them. I could not ask them to admit a convicted thief as one of them; and if I did, my
     own influence over them would be gone. It is because they know I
      would never pardon the smallest dereliction of duty that I
     keep them up to the mark: with what face then could I place among them such an unsatisfactory
     companion as your protégé? The thing would be impossible!
     With the woman perhaps I can do something. If she is young, she cannot be wholly hardened, and
     I could get her into the — Street Reformatory.”
“No,” said Joshua, “I will not consent to her going into a reformatory. It is not that she
     needs. In a reformatory she will be continually reminded of what I want her to forget. She
     would be made morbid by incessant thought about herself; taught to say penitential psalms when
     she should be set to learn some skilled employment that would be of use to her in the future. I
     wish her to be kept virtuous through self-respect,
      and by being placed beyond the need of going back to such a
     life. I do not want her to be weakened by a self-torturing contrition for the past, or
     terrified at the prospect of eternal damnation for the future. I want her to be lifted up, not
     cast down.”
“You surely do not make light of repentance!” cried Mr. C. warmly. “What other assurance have
     we that she will not fail again?”
“The best assurance, sir, will be to teach her self-respect and the means of gaining an
     honest living,” said Joshua.
“You are a rank materialist, Davidson!” said Mr. C. “I cannot stand your referring sin to
     mere social conditions. Are there no such things as sins in high places? Poverty and ignorance
     are not the only roots of human wickedness!”

“About the strongest though,” Joshua answered.
“And the sins of luxury—”
“Make Mary Prinsep and her class,” interrupted Joshua. “See here, sir, what are you asked to
     do?—to repair, in a very small way, the evil done by society. You represent society at this
     moment, and you are asked to undo a portion of your own bad work.”
“Pshaw!” said Mr. C. “I have not made Mary bad!”
He was an individual kind of man, and never saw beyond his own point.
“Well,” he then said, “I will do what I can for the young woman. My wife wants an
     under-servant; I will put the case to her; but I rely on you,” he added, old habits of thought
     coming back to steady
      him in this sudden taking-off of his feet, as it were; “I
     rely on you that I am dealing with a woman substantially repentant, and so far purified; and
     that she will not corrupt the rest. For it is a dangerous experiment at the best.”
“She is good enough for any one to trust and to love,” said Joshua warmly; and Mr. C. looked
     at him with a sharp, suspicious glance that quite changed his face. “And I thank you heartily,”
     Joshua went on to say, unconscious that he had caused the slightest discomfort in the
     gentleman's mind; “you have done a good work to-day—a work of brotherhood with Christ.”
“I trust I am not doing wrong,” said Mr. C. doubtfully; “but it is against my principles, you
     know. I cannot help feeling
      that I am rewarding a woman, because she has lived a life of
     infamy, with a position which hundreds of virtuous girls would be rejoiced to fill.”
“If your economic conscience troubles you, sir, lay it at rest by the answer our Lord made to
     Himself, when He asked the Canaanitish woman if it were meet to cast the children's bread to
     dogs.”
“For all that, I cannot think it a duty to reward vice,” persisted Mr. C. “And in doing what
     I am doing now, I wish it to be distinctly understood that it is at your instance.”
“Which means that you refuse the responsibility?”
“It does.”
“So be it, sir. I accept it.”
“That will not help me much if the thing
      turns out ill,” said Mr. C. in a discomposed voice.
“Oh, sir, have faith in human nature!” said Joshua earnestly—so earnestly that I believe the
     tears were in his eyes: they were in his voice.
“It is because I know human nature that I have so little faith in it,” said Mr. C. “Every one
     wants the help of strict moral principle to enable him to steer clear of the temptations so
     sure to beset him, and these fallen brothers and sisters are but leaky vessels at the best. If
     human nature was the grand thing you say it is, Mr. Davidson, of what need the coming of
     Christ? You are a Christian.”
“And it is because Christ lived that I believe in humanity,” said Joshua.
On which, Mr. C. said, with a smile,
      “There is no doing anything with you, Mr. Davidson; you are
     as unconvinceable as a woman,” shook hands with him kindly enough, and left.
A day or two after this he came again, with many kind words, much regret and I doubt not
     genuine, but—his wife was as afraid of our poor Mary as he had been of Joe Traill, and refused
     to take her into her house. If the other servants should ever know; if Mary had imposed on
     Joshua, and was really of no good; if she should corrupt the younger ones; and then the repute
     of their house—the duty they owed their neighbours to keep up a stainless appearance. No, there
     could be no home for her there; but the lady sent a note, full of that half-censorious advice a
     virtuous woman knows so well how to administer to her fallen
      sisters—a parcel of tracts (Mary could not read), and a
     renewal of her husband's offer to get her in the — Street Reformatory. After which perhaps some
     kind Christian person would be found to take her, she said, endorsed as she would then be by
     the Lady Superintendent of the establishment. For without casting any slur on Mr. Davidson, she
     went on to say, the voucher of only a young man was not quite satisfactory to a mistress who
     cared for the honour of her house. And perhaps she was right. But then Joshua was not like
     other young men; only she did not know this and Christians think it no sin to suspect all
     manner of evil of each other, unless they know for certain it does not exist.
Well, it was a disappointment; but
      Joshua was not a man to be cast down for one blow or a
     dozen; so he set to work to find some one who would take her, knowing her past life; and at
     last lighted on a good, tender-hearted, but timid woman, who received her in full faith so far
     as the girl herself was concerned, but on the express condition that no one should ever know
     what she had been, and that there was to be no kind of communication between her and ourselves,
     or any of her old Church-court friends. To these terms Joshua advised her to submit; so with
     many tears poor Mary went away to take the place of kitchen-maid in a family living at a little
     distance from London, where, as the lady said, she had a chance now of redeeming herself, and a
     new start given her altogether.
“And if I do well, Joshua, you will be
      pleased with me?” she said as she was bidding us
     good-by.
“More than pleased, Mary,” he said. “You know that I trust you, and that we both love
     you—John here as well as I.”
Mary's face was as white as the frill round her neck. “Joshua!” she said, looking up at him,
     “give me one kiss before I go; it will help me.”
Joshua bent his noble head and kissed her tenderly.
“God be with you, sister!” he said, and his voice a little failed him.
“And I will say the prayer you taught me, Joshua, regularly morning and evening when I ain't
     too sleepy,” said Mary simply. “And you will pray for me too?”
“As I do ever, my girl,” said Joshua: “and I believe that God hears us!”

“Then He will hear me!” said Mary with a kindling face; “and I'll pray harder nor ever for
     the thing I want!”
Poor Mary! prayer was naught but a “charm” to her as yet. She had never heard one, never
     offered one, till Joshua taught her the Lord's Prayer, with a childish hymn and a childish “God
     bless all I love” at the end; and she repeated what she had been taught as a young child might;
     believing that it did good because she had been told so by one she loved and trusted, but
     realising nothing more. Or if she realised anything, it was that she prayed to Joshua, grown
     very great and strong, and a long way off.
</div></body></text></TEI>