

CHAPTER II.
THE HEROES.
Mrs. Tracy's sons were as unlike each other as it is well possible for two human beings to
     be, both in person and character. Julian, whose forward and bold spirit gained him from the
     very cradle every prerogative of eldership (and he did struggle first into life, too, so he was
     the first-born), had grown to be a swarthy, strong, big-boned man, of the Roman-nosed, or, more
     physiognomically, the Jewish cast of countenance; with melo-dramatic elf-locks, large whiskers,
     and ungovernable passions; loud, fierce, impetuous; cunning, too, for all his overbearing
     clamour; and an embodied personification of those choice essentials to criminal happiness—a
     hard heart and a good digestion. Charles, on the contrary (or, as logicians would say, on the
     contradictory), was fair-haired, blue-eyed, of Grecian features; slim, though well enough for
     inches, and had hitherto (as the commonalty have it) "enjoyed" weak health: he was gentle and
     affectionate in heart, pure and religious in mind, studious and unobtrusive in habits. It was a
     wonder to see the strange diversity between those own twin-brothers, born within the same hour,
     and, it is superfluous to add, of the same parents; brought up in all outward things alike, and
     who had shared equally in all that might be called advantage or disadvantage, of circumstance
     or education.
Certain is it that minds are different at birth, and require as different a treatment as
     Iceland moss from cactuses, or bull-dogs from bull-finches: certain is it, too, that Julian,
     early submitted and resolutely broken in, would have made as great a man, as Charles, naturally
     meek, did make a good one; but for the matter of educating her boys, poor Mrs. Tracy had no
     more notion of the feat, than of squaring the circle, or determining the longitude. She kept
     them both at home, till the peevish aunt could suffer Julian's noise no longer: the house was a
     Pandemonium, and the giant grown too big for that castle of Otranto; so he must go at any rate;
     and (as no difference in the treatment of different characters ever occurred to any body) of
     course Charles must go along with him. Away they went to an expensive school, which Julian's
     insubordination on the instant could not brook—and, accordingly, he ran away; without doubt,
     Charles must be taken away too. Another school was tried, Julian
     got expelled this time; and Charles, in spite of prizes, must, on system, be
     removed with him: so forth, with like wisdom, all through the years of adolescence and
     instruction, those ill-matched brothers were driven as a pair. Then again, for fashion's sake,
     and Aunt Green's whims, the circumspective mother, notwithstanding all her inconsistencies,
     gave each of them prettily bound hand-books of devotion; which the one used upon his knees, and
     the other lit cigars withal; both extremes having exceeded her intention: and she proved
     similarly overreached when she persisted in treating both exactly alike, as to liberal
     allowances, and liberty of will; the result being, that one of her sons "foolishly" spent his
     money in a multitude of charitable hobbies; and that the other was constantly supplied with
     means for (the mother was sorry to say it, vulgar) dissipation. By consequence, Charles did
     more good, and Julian more evil, than I have time to stop and tell off.
If any thing in this life must be personal, peculiar, and specific, it is education: we take
     upon ourselves to speak thus dogmatically, not of mere school-teaching only, musa,
     musæ, and so forth; nor yet of lectures, on relative qualities of carbon and nitrogen
     in vegetables; no, nor even of schemes of theology, or codes of morals; but we do speak of the
     daily and hourly reining-in, or letting-out, of discouragement in one appetite, and
     encouragement in another; of habitual formation of characters in their diversity; and of
     shaping their bear's-cub, or that child-angel, the natural human mind, to its destined ends;
     that it may turn out, for good, according to its several natures, to be either the
     strong-armed, bold-eyed, rough-hewer of God's grand designs, or the delicate-fingered polisher
     of His rarest sculptures. Julian, well-trained, might have grown to be a Luther; and many a
     gentle soul like Charles, has turned out a coxcomb and a sensualist.
The boys were born, as I have said, in the regulation order of things, a few months after
     Captain Tracy sailed away for India some full score of years, and more, from this present hour,
     when we have seen him seated as a general in the library at Burleigh; and, until the last year,
     they had never seen their father—scarcely ever heard of him.
The incidents of their lives had been few and common-place: it would be easy, but wearisome,
     to specify the orchards and the bee-hives which Julian had robbed as a school-boy; the
     rebellions he had headed; the monkey tricks he had played upon old fish-women; and the cruel
     havoc he made of cats, rats, and other poor tormented creatures, who had ministered to his
     wanton and brutalizing joys. In like
     manner, wearily, but easily, might I relate how Charles grew up the nurse's
     darling, though little of his flaunting mother's; the curly-pated young book-worm; the
     sympathizing, innoffensive, gentle heart, whose effort still it was to countervail his
     brother's evil: how often, at the risk of blows, had he interposed to save some drowning puppy:
     how often paid the bribe for Julian's impunity, when mulcted for some damage done in the way of
     broken windows, upset apple-stalls, and the like: how often had he screened his bad
     twin-brother from the flagellatory consequences of sheer idleness, by doing for him all his
     school-tasks: how often striven to guide his insensate conscience to truth, and good, and
     wisdom: how often, and how vainly!
And when the youths grew up, and their good and evil grew up with them, it were possible to
     tell you a heart-rending tale of Julian's treachery to more than one poor village beauty; and
     many a pleasing trait of Charles's pure benevolence, and wise zeal to remedy his brother's
     mischiefs. The one went about doing ill, and the other doing good: Julian, on account of
     obligations, more truly than in spite of them, hated Charles; and yet one great aim of all
     Charles's amiabilities tended continually to Julian's good, and he strove to please him, too,
     while he wished to bless him. The one had grown to manhood, full of unrepented sins, and ripe
     for darker crime: the other had attained a like age of what is somewhat satirically called
     discretion, having amassed, with Solon of old, "knowledge day by day," having lived a life of
     piety and purity, and blest with a cheerful disposition, that teemed with happy thoughts.
They had, of course, in the progress of human life, been both laid upon the bed of sickness,
     where, with similar contrast, the one lay muttering discontent, and the other smiling
     patiently: they had both been in dangers by land and by sea, where Julian, though not a little
     lacking to himself at the moment of peril, was still loudly minacious till it came too near;
     while Charles, with all his caution, was more actually courageous, and in spite of all his
     gentleness, stood against the worst undaunted: they had both, with opposite motives and
     dissimilar modes of life, passed through various vicissitudes of feeling, scene, society; and
     the influence of circumstance on their different characters, heightened or diminished, bettered
     or depraved, by the good or evil principle in each, had produced their different and probable
     results.
Thus, strangely dissimilar, the twin-brothers together stand before us: Julian the strong
     impersonation of the animal man, as Charles of the intellectual; Julian, matter; Charles,
     spirit; Julian, the creature of this
     world, tending to a lower and a worse: Charles, though in the world, not of the
     world, and reaching to a higher and a better.
Mrs. Tracy, the mother of this various progeny, had been somewhat of a beauty in her day,
     albeit much too large and masculine for the taste of ordinary mortals; and though now very
     considerably past forty, the vain vast female was still ambitious of compliment, and greedy of
     admiration. That Julian should be such a woman's favourite will surprise none: she had, she
     could have, no sympathies with mild and thoughtful Charles; but rather dreaded to set her
     flaunting folly in the light of his wise glance, and sought to hide her humbled vanity from his
     pure and keen perceptions. His very presence was a tacit rebuke to her social dissipation, and
     she could not endure the mild radiance of his virtues. He never fawned and flattered her, as
     Julian would; but had even suffered filial presumption (it could not be affection—O dear, no!)
     to go so far as gently to expostulate at what he fancied wrong; he never gave her reason to
     contrast, with happy self-complacence, her own soul's state with Charles's, however she could
     with Julian's: and then, too, she would indulgently allow her foolish mind—a woman's, though a
     parent's—to admire that tall, black, bandit-looking son, above the slight build, the delicate
     features, and almost feminine elegance of his brother: she found Julian always ready to
     countenance and pamper her gayest wishes, and was glad to make him her escort every where—at
     balls, and fêtes, and races, and archery parties; while as to Charles, he would be the
     stay-at-home, the milk-sop, the learned pundit, the pious prayer-monger, any thing but the
     ladies' man. Yes: it is little wonder that Mrs. Tracy's heart clave to Julian, the masculine
     image of herself; while it barely tolerated Charles, who was a rarefied and idealized likeness
     of the absent and forgotten Tracy.
But the mother—and there are many silly mothers, almost as many as silly men and silly
     maids—in her admiration of the outward form of manliness, overlooked the true strength, and
     chivalry, and nobleness of mind which shone supreme in Charles. How would Julian have acted in
     such a case as this?—a sheep had wandered down the cliff's face to a narrow ledge of rock,
     whence it could not come back again, for there was no room to turn: Julian would have pelted
     it, and set his bull-dog at it, and rejoiced to have seen the poor animal's frantic leaps from
     shingly shelf to shelf, till it would be dashed to pieces. But how did Charles act? With the
     utmost courage, and caution, and presence of mind, he crept down, and, at the risk of his life,
     dragged the bleating,
     unreluctant creature up again; it really seemed as if the ungrateful poor dumb
     brute recognised its humane friend, and suffered him to rescue it without a struggle or a
     motion that might have endangered both.
Again: a burly costermonger was belabouring his donkey, and the wretched beast fell beneath
     his cudgel: strange to say, Julian and Charles were walking together that time; and the same
     sight affected each so differently, that the one sided with the cruel man, and the other with
     his suffering victim: Charles, in momentary indignation, rushed up to the fellow, wrested the
     cudgel from his hand, and flung it over the cliff; while Julian was so base, so cowardly, as to
     reward such generous interference, by holding his weaker brother's arms, and inviting the
     wrathful costermonger to expend the remainder of his phrensy on unlucky Charles. Yes, and when
     at home Mrs. Tracy heard all this, she was silly enough, wicked enough, to receive her truly
     noble son with ridicule, and her other one, the child of her disgrace, with approval.
"It will teach you, Master Charles, not to meddle with common people and their donkeys; and
     you may thank your brother Julian for giving you a lesson how a gentleman should behave."
Poor Charles! but poorer Julian, and poorest Mrs. Tracy!
It would be easy, if need were, to enumerate multiplied examples tending towards the same
     end—a large, masculine-featured mother's foolish preference of the loud, bold, worldly animal,
     before the meek, kind, noble, spiritual. And the results of all these many matters were, that
     now, at twenty years of age, Charles found himself, as it were, alone in a strange land, with
     many common friends indeed abroad, but at home no nearer, dearer ties to string his heart's
     dank lyre withal; neither mother nor brother, nor any other kind familiar face, to look upon
     his gentleness in love, or to sympathize with his affections, unapprehended, unappreciated:
     so—while Mrs. Tracy was the showy, gay, and vapid thing she ever had been, and Julian the same
     impetuous mother's son which his very nurse could say she knew him—Charles grew up a shy and
     silent youth, necessarily reserved, for lack of some one to understand him; necessarily
     chilled, for want of somebody to love him.
