
CHAPTER VIII.
The morning broke lowering and thunderous; small white clouds, dull and immovable,
       studded the leaden sky; the waters of the rushing Darl seemed to have become black and almost
       stagnant; the terraces of Hellingsley looked like the hard lines of a model; and the mansion
       itself had a harsh and metallic character. Before the chief portal of his Hall, the elder
       Millbank, with an air of some anxiety, surveyed the landscape and the heavens, as if he were
       speculating on the destiny of the day.
Often his eye wandered over the partk; often with an uneasy and restless step he paced the
        raised walk before him. The clock of Hellingsley church had given the chimes of
       noon. His son and Coningsby appeared at the end of one of the avenues. His eye lightened; his
       lip became compressed; he advanced to meet them.
"Are you going to fish to-day, Oswald?" he inquired of his son.
"We had some thoughts of it, sir."
"A fine day for sport, I should think," he observed as he turned towards the Hall with
       them.
Coningsby remarked the fanciful beauty of the portal; its twisted columns, and Caryatides
       carved in dark oak.
"Yes, it's very well," said Millbank, "but I really do not know why I came here; my
       presence is an effort. Oswald does not care for the place; none of us do, I believe."
"Oh! I like it now father; and Edith dotes on it."
"She was very happy at Millbank," said the father rather sharply.
"We are all of us happy at Millbank," said Oswald.

"I was much struck with the valley and the whole settlement when I first saw it," said
       Coningsby.
"Suppose you go and see about the tackle, Oswald," said Mr. Millbank, "and Mr. Coningsby
       and I will take a stroll on the terrace in the meantime."
The habit of obedience which was supreme in this family instantly carried Oswald away,
       though he was rather puzzled why his father should be so particularly anxious about the
       preparation of the fishing tackle, as he very rarely used it. His son had no sooner departed
       than Mr. Millbank turned to Coningsby and said very abruptly.
"You have never seen my own room here, Mr. Coningsby; step in; for I wish to say a word or
       two to you." And thus speaking, he advanced before the astonished, and rather agitated
       Coningsby, and led the way through a door and long passage to a room of moderate dimensions,
       partly furnished as a library, and full of parliamentary papers and blue books. Shutting the
       door with some earnestness and
        pointing to a chair, he begged his guest to be seated. Both in their chairs,
       Mr. Millbank clearing his throat, said without preface, "I have reason to believe, Mr.
       Coningsby, that you are attached to my daughter."
"I have been attached to her for a long time; most ardently," replied Coningsby in a calm
       and rather measured tone, but looking very pale.
"And I have reason to believe that she returns your attachment," said Mr. Millbank.
"I believe she deigns—not to disregard it," said Coningsby, his white cheek becoming
       scarlet.
"It is then a mutual attachment, which if cherished, must produce mutual unhappiness," said
       Mr. Millbank.
"I would fain believe the reverse," said Coningsby.
"Why?" inquired Mr. Millbank.
"Because I believe she possesses every charm, quality and virtue, that can bless man; and
       because, though I can make her no equivalent return, I have a heart, if I know myself, that
       would struggle to deserve her."

"I know you to be a man of sense; I believe you to be a man of honour," replied Mr.
       Millbank. "As the first, you must feel that an union between you and my daughter is
       impossible; what then should be your duty as a man of correct principle is obvious."
"I could conceive that our union might be attended with difficulties," said Coningsby in a
       somewhat deprecating tone.
"Sir, it is impossible," repeated Mr. Millbank interrupting him though not with harshness,
       "that is to say there is no conceivable marriage which could be effected at greater
       sacrifices, and which would occasion greater misery."
"The sacrifices are more apparent to me than the misery," said Coningsby, "and even they
       may be imaginary."
"The sacrifices and the misery are certain and inseparable," said Mr. Millbank. "Come now,
       see how we stand! I speak without reserve, for this is a subject which cannot permit
       misconceptions, but with no feeling towards you, sir, but fair and very friendly ones. You
       are the grandson of my Lord Monmouth; at present
        enjoying his favour, but dependent on his bounty. You may be the heir of his
       wealth to-morrow, and to-morrow you may be the object of his hatred and persecution. Your
       grandfather and myself are foes: bitter, irreclaimable, to the death. It is idle to mince
       phrases; I do not vindicate our mutual feelings, I may regret that they have ever arisen; I
       may regret it especially at this exigency. They are not the feelings of good Christians; they
       may be altogether to be deplored and unjustifiable; but they exist, mutually exist; and have
       not been confined to words. Lord Monmouth would crush me had he the power, like a worm; and I
       have curbed his proud fortunes often. Were it not for this feeling, I should not be here; I
       purchased this estate merely to annoy him, as I have done a thousand other acts merely for
       his discomfiture and mortification. In our long encounter I have done him infinitely more
       injury than he could do me; I have been on the spot, I am active, vigilant, the maker of my
       fortunes. He is an Epicurean, continually in foreign parts, obliged to leave the fulfilment
       of his will to
        others. But for these very reasons his hate is more intense. I can afford to
       hate him less than he hates me—I have injured him more. Here are feelings to exist between
       human beings! But they do exist—and now you are to go to this man, and ask his sanction to
       marry my daughter!"
"But I would appease these hatreds; I would allay these dark passions, the origin of which
       I know not, but which never could justify the end, and which lead to so much misery. I would
       appeal to my grandfather—I would show him Edith."
"He has looked upon as fair even as Edith," said Mr. Millbank rising suddenly from his
       seat, and pacing the room, "and did that melt his heart? The experience of your own lot
       should have guarded you from the perils that you have so rashly meditated encountering, and
       the misery which you have been preparing for others besides yourself. Is my daughter to be
       treated like your mother? And by the same hand? Your mother's family were not Lord Monmouth's
       foes. They were simple and innocent
        people, free from all the bad passions of our nature, and ignorant of the
       world's ways. But because they were not noble, because they could trace no mystified descent
       from a foreign invader or the sacrilegious minion of some spoliating despot, their daughter
       was hunted from the family which should have exulted to receive her, and the land of which
       she was the native ornament. Why should a happier lot await you than fell to your parents?
       You are in the same position as your father; you meditate the same act. The only difference
       being aggravating circumstances in your case, which even if I were a member of the same order
       as my Lord Monmouth, would prevent the possibility of a prosperous union. Marry Edith, and
       you blast all the prospects of your life, and entail on her a sense of unceasing humiliation.
       Would you do this? Should I permit you to do this?"
Coningsby with his head resting on his arm his face a little shaded, his eyes fixed on the
       ground, listened in silence. There was a pause; broken by Coningsby, as in a low voice, with
       out changing his posture or raising his glance,
        he said: "It seems, sir, that you were acquainted with my mother?"
"I knew sufficient of her," replied Mr. Millbank with a kindling cheek, "to learn the
       misery that a woman may entail on herself by marrying out of her condition. I have bred my
       children in a respect for their class. I believe they have imbibed my feeling; though it is
       strange how in the commerce of the world, chance, in their friendships, has apparently
       baffled my designs."
"Oh! do not say it is chance, sir," said Coningsby looking up, and speaking with much
       fervour. "The feelings that animate me towards your family are not the feelings of chance:
       they are the creation of sympathy; tried by time, tested by thought. And must they perish?
       Can they perish? They were inevitable; they are indestructible. Yes, sir, it is in vain to
       speak of the enmities that are fostered between you and my grandfather; the love that exists
       between your daughter and myself is stronger than all your hatreds."
"You speak like a young man, and a young
        man that is in love," said Mr. Millbank. "This is mere rhapsody; it will vanish
       in an instant before the reality of life. And you have arrived at that reality," he
       continued, speaking with emphasis, leaning over the back of his chair and looking steadily at
       Coningsby with his grey, sagacious eye, "My daughter and yourself can meet no more."
"It is impossible you can be so cruel!" exclaimed Coningsby.
"So kind; kind to you both; for I wish to be kind to you as well as to her. You are
       entitled to kindness from us all; though I will tell you now, that, years ago, when the news
       arrived that my son's life had been saved, and had been saved by one who bore the name of
       Coningsby, I had a presentiment great as was the blessing, that it might lead to
       unhappiness."
"I can answer for the misery of one," said Coningsby, in a tone of great despondency. "I
       feel as if my sun were set. Oh! why should there be such wretchedness! Why are there family
       hatreds and party feuds! Why am I the most wretched of men!"

"My good young friend, you will live I doubt not to be a very happy one. Happiness is not
       as we are apt to fancy entirely dependent on these contingencies. It is the lot of most men
       to endure what you are now suffering, and they can look back to such conjunctures through the
       vista of years with calmness."
"I may see Edith now?"
"Frankly, I should say, no. My daughter is in her room; I have had some conversation with
       her. Of course she suffers not less than yourself. To see her again, will only aggravate woe.
       You leave under this roof, sir, some sad memories, but no unkind ones. It is not likely that
       I can serve you, or that you may want my aid; but whatever may be in my power, remember you
       may command it—without reserve and without restraint. If I control myself now, it is not
       because I do not respect your affliction, but because in the course of my life I have felt
       too much not to be able to command my feelings."
"You never could have felt what I feel now," said Coningsby, in a tone of anguish.

"You touch on delicate ground," said Millbank, "yet from me you may learn to suffer. There
       was a being once, not less fair than the peerless girl that you would fain call your own, and
       her heart was my proud possession. There were no family feuds to baffle our union, nor was I
       dependent on anything, but the energies which had already made me flourishing. What happiness
       was mine! It was the first dream of my life, and it was the last; my solitary passion, the
       memory of which softens my heart. Ah! you dreaming scholars, and fine gentlemen who saunter
       through life, you think there is no romance in the loves of a man who lives in the toil and
       turmoil of business. You are in deep error. Amid my career of travail, there was ever a
       bright form which animated exertion; inspired my invention, nerved my energy, and to gain
       whose heart and life, I first made many of those discoveries and entered into many of those
       speculations, that have since been the foundation of my wide prosperity.
"Her faith was pledged to me; I lived upon her image; the day was even talked of when
        I should bear her to the home that I had proudly prepared for her.
"There came a young noble, a warrior who had never seen war, glittering with gew-gaws. He
       was quartered in the town where the mistress of my heart, and who was soon to share my life
       and my fortunes, resided. The tale is too bitter not to be brief. He saw her, he sighed; I
       will hope that he loved her; she gave him with rapture the heart which perhaps she found she
       had never given me; and instead of bearing the name I had once hoped to have called her by,
       she pledged her faith at the altar to one who like you was called— Coningsby ."
"My mother!"
"You see, I too have had my griefs."
"Dear sir," said Coningsby, rising and taking Mr. Millbank's hand, "I am most wretched; and
       yet I wish to part from you even with affection. You have explained circumstances that have
       long perplexed me. A curse I fear is on our families. I have not mind enough at this moment
       even to ponder on my situation. My head is a chaos. I go; yes, I quit this
        Hellingsley, where I came to be so happy, where I have been so happy. Nay, let
       me go, dear sir! I must be alone, I must try to think. And tell her—no, tell her nothing. God
       will guard over us!"
Proceeding down the avenue with a rapid and distempered step, his countenance lost as it
       were in a wild abstraction, Coningsby encountered Oswald Millbank. He stopped, collected his
       turbulent thoughts, and throwing on Oswald one glance that seemed at the same time to
       communicate woe and to demand sympathy, flung himself into his arms.
"My friend!" he exclaimed, and then added in a broken voice, "I need a friend."
Then in a hurried, impassioned, and somewhat incoherent strain, leaning on Oswald's arm, as
       they walked on together, he poured forth all that had occurred, all of which he had dreamed;
       his baffled bliss, his actual despair. Alas! there was little room for solace, and yet all
       that earnest affection could inspire and a sagacious brain and a brave spirit were offered
       for his support, if not his
        consolation, by the friend who was devoted to him.
In the midst of this deep communion, teeming with every thought and sentiment that could
       enchain and absorb the spirit of man, they came to one of the park gates of Coningsby.
       Millbank stopped. The command of his father was peremptory, that no member of his family
       under any circumstances or for any consideration should set his foot on that domain. Lady
       Wallinger had once wished to have seen the Castle, and Coningsby was only too happy in the
       prospect of escorting her and Edith over the place; but Oswald had then at once put his veto
       on the project, as a thing forbidden; and which if put in practice his father would never
       pardon. So it passed off, and now Oswald himself was at the gates of that very domain with
       his friend who was about to enter them, his friend whom he might never see again, that
       Coningsby who from their boyish days had been the idol of his life, whom he had lived to see
       appeal to his affections and his sympathy, and whom Oswald was now going
        to desert in the midst of his lonely and unsolaced woe.
"I ought not to enter here," said Oswald holding the hand of Coningsby as he hesitated to
       advance; "and yet there are duties more sacred even than obedience to a father. I cannot
       leave you thus, friend of my best heart!"
The morning passed away in unceasing yet fruitless speculation on the future. One moment
       something was to happen, the next nothing could occur. Sometimes a beam of hope flashed over
       the fancy of Coningsby, and jumping up from the turf, on which they were reclining, he seemed
       to exult in his renovated energies; and then this sanguine paroxysm was succeeded by a fit of
       depression so dark and dejected, that nothing but the presence of Oswald seemed to prevent
       Coningsby from flinging himself into the waters of the Darl.
The day was fast declining, and the inevitable moment of separation was at hand. Oswald
       wished to appear at the dinner table of Hellingsley
        that no suspicion might arise in the mind of his father of his having
       accompanied Coningsby home. But just as he was beginning to mention the necessity of his
       departure, a flash of lightning seemed to transfix the heavens. The sky was very dark; though
       studded here and there with dingy sports. The young men sprang up at the same time.
"We had better get out of these trees," said Oswald.
"We had better get to the Castle," said Coningsby.
A clap of thunder that seemed to make the park quake broke over their heads, followed by
       some thick drops. The Castle was close at hand; Oswald had avoided entering it; but the
       impending storm was so menacing, that hurried on by Coningsby he could make no resistance;
       and in a few minutes, the companions were watching the tempest from the windows of a room in
       Coningsby Castle.
The forked lightning flashed and scintillated from every quarter of the horizon: the
       thunder
        broke over the Castle as if the keep were rocking with artillery: amid the
       momentary pauses of the explosion, the rain was heard descending like dissolving
       water-spouts.
Nor was this one of those transient tempests that often agitate the summer. Time advanced,
       and its fierceness was little mitigated. Sometimes there was a lull, though the violence of
       the rain never appeared to diminish; but then as in some pitched fight between contending
       hosts, when the fervour of the field seems for a moment to allay, fresh squadrons arrive and
       renew the hottest strife, so a low moaning wind that was now at intervals faintly heard, bore
       up a great reserve of electric vapour, that formed as it were into field, in the space
       between the Castle and Hellingsley, and then discharged its violence on that fated
       district.
Coningsby and Oswald exchanged looks. "You must not think of going home at present, my dear
       fellow," said the first. "I am sure your father would not be displeased. There is not a being
       here who even knows you, and if they did—what then?"

The servant entered the room, and inquired whether the gentlemen were ready for dinner.
"By all means; come, my dear, Millbank, I feel reckless as the tempest; let us drown our
       cares in wine!"
Coningsby in fact was exhausted by all the agitation of the day, and all the harassing
       spectres of the future. He found wine a momentary solace. He ordered the servants away, and
       for a moment felt a degree of wild satisfaction in the company of the brother of Edith.
Thus they sate for a long time, talking only of one subject, and repeating almost the same
       things, yet both felt happier in being together. Oswald had risen, and opening the window,
       examined the approaching night. The storm had lulled, though the rain still fell; in the west
       was a streak of light. In a quarter of an hour, he calculated on departing. As he was
       watching the wind, he thought he heard the sound of wheels, which reminded him of Coningsby's
       promise to lend him a light carriage for his return.

They sate down once more; they had filled their glasses for the last time; to pledge to
       their faithful friendship, and the happiness of Coningsby and Edith; when the door of the
       room opened, and there appeared— Mr. Rigby .
END OF BOOK VII.

