
CHAPTER III.
Lord Monmouth , who detested popular tumults as much as he despised public
       opinion, had remained during the agitating year of 1831 in his luxurious retirement in Italy,
       contenting himself with opposing the Reform Bill by proxy. But when his correspondent, Mr.
       Rigby, had informed him in the early part of the spring of 1832 of the probability of a
       change in the tactics of the Tory party, and that an opinion was becoming prevalent among
       their friends, that the great scheme must be defeated in detail rather than again withstood
       on principle, his Lordship, who was
        never wanting in energy, when his own interests were concerned, immediately
       crossed the Alps, and travelled rapidly to England. He indulged a hope that the weight of his
       presence and the influence of his strong character, which was at once shrewd and courageous,
       might induce his friends to relinquish their half measure, a course to which his nature was
       very repugnant. At all events, if they persisted in their intention, and the Bill went into
       committee, his presence was indispensable, for in that stage of a parliamentary proceeding
       proxies become ineffective.
The councils of Lord Monmouth, though they coincided with those of the Duke of Wellington,
       did not prevail with the Waverers. Several of these high-minded personages had had their
       windows broken, and they were not of opinion that a man who lived at Naples was a competent
       judge of the state of public feeling in England. Besides, the days are gone by for Senates to
       have their beards
        plucked in the Forum. We live in an age of prudence. The leaders of the people,
       now, generally follow. The truth is, the peers were in a fright. 'Twas a pity; there is
       scarcely a less dignified entity than a patrician in a panic.
Among the most intimate companions of Coningsby at Eton, was Lord Henry Sydney, his
       kinsman. Coningsby had frequently passed his holidays of late at Beaumanoir, the seat of the
       Duke, Lord Henry's father. The Duke sate next to Lord Monmouth during the debate on the
       enfranchising question, and to wile away the time, and from kindness of disposition spoke,
       and spoke with warmth and favour, of his grandson. The polished Lord Monmouth bowed as if he
       were much gratified by this notice of one so dear to him. He had too much tact to admit that
       he had never yet seen his grandchild; but he asked some questions as to his progress and
       pursuits, his tastes and habits, which intimated the interest of an affectionate
       relative.

Nothing, however, was ever lost upon Lord Monmouth. No one had a more retentive memory, or
       a more observant mind. And the next day, when he received Mr. Rigby at his morning levee,
       (Lord Monmouth performed this ceremony in the high style of the old court, and welcomed his
       visitors in bed), he said with imperturbable calmness, and as if he had been talking of
       trying a new horse, "Rigby, I should like to see the boy at Eton."
There might be some objection to grant leave to Coningsby at this moment; but it was a rule
       with Mr. Rigby never to make difficulties, or at least to persuade his patron, that he, and
       he only, could remove them. He immediately undertook that the boy should be forthcoming, and,
       notwithstanding the excitement of the moment, he went off next morning to fetch him.
They arrived in town rather early, and Rigby wishing to know how affairs were going on,
        ordered the servant to drive immediately to the head-quarters of the party;
       where a permanent committee watched every phasis of the impending revolution; and where every
       member of the opposition of note and trust was instantly admitted to receive or to impart
       intelligence.
It was certainly not without emotion, that Coningsby contemplated his first interview with
       his grandfather. All his experience of the ties of relationship, however limited, were full
       of tenderness and rapture. His memory often dwelt on his mother's sweet embrace; and ever and
       anon a fitful phantom of some past passage of domestic love haunted his gushing heart. The
       image of his father was less fresh in his mind; but still it was associated with a vague
       sentiment of kindness and joy; and the allusions to Mr. Coningsby in his mother's letters had
       cherished these impressions. To notice lesser sources of influence in his estimate of the
       domestic tie, he had witnessed under the roof of Beaumanoir, the existence of a family bound
        together by the most beautiful affections. He could not forget how Henry Sydney
       was embraced by his sisters when he returned home; what frank and fraternal love existed
       between his cousin and his elder brother; how affectionately the kind Duke had welcomed his
       son once more to the house where they had both been born; and the dim eyes and saddened
       brows, and tones of tenderness which rather looked than said farewell, when they went back to
       Eton.
And these rapturous meetings and these mournful adieus were occasioned only by a separation
       at the most of a few months, softened by constant correspondence, and the communication of
       mutual sympathy. But Coningsby was to meet a relation, his nearest, almost his only, relation
       for the first time; the relation too to whom he owed maintenance, education—it might be said,
       existence. It was a great incident for a great drama; something tragical in the depth and
       stir of its emotions. Even the imagination of the boy could not be insensible to its
        materials; and Coningsby was picturing to himself a beneficent and venerable
       gentleman pressing to his breast an agitated youth, when his reverie was broken by the
       carriage stopping before the gates of Monmouth House.
The gates were opened by a gigantic Swiss, and the carriage rolled into a huge court yard.
       At its end, Coningsby beheld a Palladian palace with wings and colonnades encircling the
       court.
A double flight of steps led into a circular and marble hall adorned with colossal busts of
       the Cæsars; the staircase in fresco by Sir James Thornhill, breathed with the loves and wars
       of Gods and heroes. It led into a vestibule painted in arabesque, hung with Venetian
       girandoles, and looking into gardens. Opening a door in this chamber, and proceeding some
       little way down a corridor, Mr. Rigby and his companion arrived at the base of a private
       staircase. Ascending a few steps, they reached a landing place hung with tapestry. Drawing
       this aside, Mr. Rigby opened a door and ushered Coningsby
        through an ante-chamber into a small saloon of beautiful proportion, and
       furnished in a brilliant and delicate taste.
"You will find more to amuse you here than where we were before," said Mr. Rigby, "and I
       shall not be nearly so long absent." So saying, he entered into an inner apartment.
The walls of the saloon, which were covered with light blue satin, held in silver pannels
       portraits of beautiful women painted by Boucher. Couches and easy chairs of every shape
       invited in every quarter to luxurious repose, while amusement was afforded by tables covered
       with caricatures, French novels, and endless miniatures of foreign dancers, princesses, and
       Sovereigns.
But Coningsby was so impressed with the impending interview with his grandfather, that he
       neither sought nor required diversion. Now that the crisis was at hand, he felt agitated and
       nervous; and wished that he was again at Eton. The suspense was sickening, yet he dreaded
       still more the summons. He was not long alone;
        the door opened—he started—grew pale—he thought it was his grandfather; it was
       not even Mr. Rigby. It was Lord Monmouth's valet.
"Monsieur Konigby?"
"My name is Coningsby," said the boy.
"Milor is ready to receive you," said the valet.
Coningsby sprang forward with that desperation which the scaffold requires. His face was
       pale; his hand was moist; his heart beat with tumult. He had occasionally been summoned by
       Dr. Keate; that too was awful work, but compared with the present, a morning visit. Music,
       artillery, the roar of cannon, and the blare of trumpets, may urge a man on to a forlorn
       hope; ambition, one's constituents, the hell of previous failure, may prevail on us to do a
       more desperate thing—speak in the House of Commons; but there are some situations in life,
       such for instance as entering the room of a dentist, when the prostration of the nervous
       system is absolute.
The moment had at length arrived, when the
        desolate was to find a benefactor, the forlorn a friend, the orphan a parent;
       when the youth, after a childhood of adversity, was to be formally received into the bosom of
       the noble house from which he had been so long estranged, and at length to assume that social
       position to which his lineage entitled him. Manliness might support, affection might soothe,
       the happy anguish of such a meeting; but it was undoubtedly one of those situations which
       stir up the deep fountains of our natures, and before which the conventional proprieties of
       our ordinary manners instantaneously vanish.
Coningsby with an uncertain step followed his guide through a bed-chamber, the
       sumptuousness of which he could not notice, into the dressing-room of Lord Monmouth. Mr.
       Rigby, facing Coningsby as he entered, was leaning over the back of a large chair, from which
       as Coningsby was announced by the valet, the Lord of the house slowly rose, for he was
       suffering slightly from the gout, and his left
        hand rested on an ivory stick. Lord Monmouth was in height above the midde size,
       but somewhat portly and corpulent. His countenance was strongly marked; sagacity on the brow,
       sensuality in the mouth and jaw. His head was bald, but there were remains of the rich brown
       locks on which he once prided himself. His large deep blue eye, madid and yet piercing,
       showed that the secretions of his brain were apportioned, half to voluptuousness, half to
       common sense. But his general mien was truly grand; full of a natural nobility, of which no
       one was more sensible. Lord Monmouth was not in dishabille; on the contrary, his costume was
       exact, and even careful. Rising as we have mentioned when his grandson entered, and leaning
       with his left hand on his ivory cane, he made Coningsby such a bow as Louis Quatorze might
       have bestowed on the ambassador of the United Provinces. Then extending his right hand, which
       the boy tremblingly touched, Lord Monmouth said:

"How do you like Eton?"
This contrast to the reception which he had imagined, hoped, feared, paralysed the reviving
       energies of young Coningsby. He felt stupified; he looked almost aghast. In the chaotic
       tumult of his mind, his memory suddenly seemed to receive some miraculous inspiration.
       Mysterious phrases heard in his earliest boyhood, unnoticed then, long since forgotten, rose
       to his ear. Who was this grandfather, seen not before, seen now for the first time? Where was
       the intervening link of blood between him and this superb and icy being? The boy sank into
       the chair which had been placed for him, and leaning on the table burst into tears.
Here was a business! If there was one thing which would have made Lord Monmouth travel from
       London to Naples at four and twenty hours' notice, it was to avoid a scene. He hated
       scenes—he hated feelings. He saw instantly the mistake he had made in sending for his
       grandchild. He was afraid that Coningsby
        was tender-hearted like his father. Another tender-hearted Coningsby!
       Unfortunate family! Degenerate race! He decided in his mind that Coningsby must be provided
       for in the Church, and looked at Mr. Rigby, whose principal business it always was to
       disembarrass his patron from the disagreeable.
Mr. Rigby instantly came forward and adroitly led the boy into the adjoining apartment,
       Lord Monmouth's bed-chamber, closing the door of the dressing-room behind him.
"My dear young friend," said Mr. Rigby, "what is all this?"
A sob the only answer,
"What can be the matter?" said Mr. Rigby.
"I was thinking," said Coningsby, "of poor mamma!"
"Hush!" said Mr. Rigby, "Lord Monmouth never likes to hear of people who are dead; so you
       must take care never to mention your mother or your father."

In the meantime Lord Monmouth had decided on the fate of Coningsby. The Marquess thought he
       could read characters by a glance, and in general he was very successful; for his natural
       sagacity had been nurtured by great experience. His grandson was not to his taste; amiable,
       no doubt, but a spooney.
We are too apt to believe that the character of a boy is easily read. 'Tis a mystery the
       most profound. Mark what blunders parents constantly make as to the nature of their own
       offspring, bred too under their eyes, and displaying every hour their characteristics. How
       often in the nursery does the genius count as a dunce because he is pensive; while a rattling
       urchin is invested with almost supernatural qualities because his animal spirits make him
       impudent and flippant! The school-boy above all others is not the simple being the world
       imagines. In that young bosom are often stirring passions as strong as our own, desires not
       less violent, a volition not less supreme. In that young
        bosom what burning love, what intense ambition, what avarice, what lust of
       power; envy that fiends might emulate, hate that man might fear!

