
CHAPTER VIII.
About a week after Coningsby's arrival in Paris, as he was sauntering on the soft
       and sunny Boulevards, soft and sunny though Christmas, he met Sidonia.
"So you are here?" said Sidonia. "Turn now with me, for I see you are only lounging, and
       tell me when you came, where you are, and what you have done since we parted. I have been
       here myself but a few days."
There was much to tell. And when Coningsby had rapidly related all that had passed, they
       talked of Paris. Sidonia had offered him hospitality, until he learned that Lord Monmouth
        was at Paris, and that Coningsby was his guest.
"I am sorry you cannot come to me," he remarked; "I would have shown you every body and
       every thing. But we shall meet often."
"I have already seen many remarkable things," said Coningsby; "and met many celebrated
       persons. Nothing more strikes me in this brilliant city than the tone of its society, so much
       higher than our own. What an absence of petty personalities! How much conversation, and how
       little gossip! Yet no where is there less pedantry. All women here as agreeable as is the
       remarkable privilege in London of some half dozen. Men too, and great men, develope their
       minds. A great man in England on the contrary is generally the dullest dog in company. And
       yet how piteous to think that so fair a civilisation should be in such imminent peril."
"Yes! that is a common opinion; and yet I am somewhat sceptical of its truth," replied
       Sidonia. "I am inclined to believe that the social system of England is in infinitely greater
       danger
        than that of France. We must not be misled by the agitated surface of this
       country. The foundations of its order are deep and sure. Learn to understand France. France
       is a Kingdom with a Republic for its capital. It has been always so, for centuries. From the
       days of the League to the days of the Sections, to the days of 1830. It is still France,
       little changed; and only more national; for it is less Frank and more Gallic; as England has
       become less Norman and more Saxon."
"And it is your opinion then, that the present King may maintain himself?"
"Every movement in this country, however apparently discordant, seems to tend to that
       inevitable end. He would not be on the throne if the nature of things had not demanded his
       presence. The Kingdom of France required a Monarch; the Republic of Paris required a
       Dictator. He comprised in his person both qualifications; lineage and intellect; blood for
       the provinces, brains for the city."
"What a position! what an individual!" exclaimed Coningsby. "Tell me," he added
        eagerly, "what is he? This Prince of whom one hears in all countries at all
       hours; on whose existence we are told the tranquillity, almost the civilisation, of Europe
       depends, yet of whom we receive accounts so conflicting, so contradictory; tell me, you who
       can tell me, tell me what he is?"
Sidonia smiled at his earnestness. "I have a creed of mine own," he remarked, "that the
       great characters of antiquity are at rare epochs re-produced for our wonder, or our guidance.
       Nature, wearied with mediocrity, pours the warm metal into an heroic mould. When
       circumstances at length placed me in the presence of the King of France, I recognised—
        Ulysses !"
"But is there no danger," resumed Coningsby, after the pause of a few moments, "that the
       Republic of Paris may absorb the Kingdom of France?"
"I suspect the reverse," replied Sidonia. "The tendency of advanced civilisation is in
       truth to pure Monarchy. Monarchy is indeed a government which requires a high degree of
       civilisation for its full development. It needs the support
        of free laws and manners, and of a widely diffused intelligence. Political
       compromises are not to be tolerated except at periods of rude transition. An educated nation
       recoils from the imperfect vicariate of what is called a representative government. Your
       House of Commons, that has absorbed all other powers in the State, will in all probability
       fall more rapidly than it rose. Public opinion has a more direct, a more comprehensive, a
       more efficient organ for its utterance, than a body of men sectionally chosen. The Printing
       Press is a political element unknown to classic or feudal times. It absorbs in a great degree
       the duties of the Sovereign, the Priest, the Parliament; it controls, it educates, it
       discusses. That public opinion when it acts would appear in the form of one who has no class
       interests. In an enlightened age the Monarch on the throne, free from the vulgar prejudices
       and the corrupt interests of the subject, becomes again divine!"
At this moment they reached that part of the Boulevard which leads into the Place of the
       Madeleine, whither Sidonia was bound; and
        Coningsby was about to quit his companion, when Sidonia said:
"I am only going to step over to the Rue Tronchet to say a few words to a friend of mine,
       M. P—s. I shall not detain you five minutes; and you should know him, for he has some capital
       pictures, and a collection of Limoges ware that is the despair of the dilettanti."
So saying they turned down by the Place of the Madeleine, and soon entered the court of the
       hotel of M. P—s. That gentleman received them in his gallery. After some general
       conversation, Coningsby turned towards the pictures, and left Sidonia with their host. The
       collection was rare; and interested Coningsby, though unacquainted with art. He sauntered on
       from picture to picture until he reached the end of the gallery, where an open door invited
       him into a suite of rooms also full of pictures, and objects of curiosity and art. As he was
       entering a second chamber, he observed a lady leaning back in a cushioned chair, and looking
       earnestly on a picture. His entrance was unheard
        and unnoticed, for the lady's back was to the door; yet Coningsby advancing in
       an angular direction, obtained nearly a complete view of her countenance. It was upraised,
       gazing on the picture with an expression of delight; the bonnet thrown back, while the large
       sable cloak of the gazer had fallen partly off. The countenance was more beautiful than the
       beautiful picture. Those glowing shades of the gallery to which love, and genius, and
       devotion had lent their inspiration, seemed without life and lustre by the radiant and
       expressive presence which Coningsby now beheld.
The finely arched brow was a little elevated, the soft dark eyes were fully opened, the
       nostril of the delicate nose slightly dilated, the small, yet rich, full, lips just parted;
       and over the clear transparent visage there played a vivid glance of gratified
       intelligence.
The lady rose, advanced towards the picture, looked at it earnestly for a few moments, and
       then turning in a direction opposite to Coningsby, walked away. She was somewhat above the
       middle stature, and yet could scarcely
        be called tall; a quality so rare, that even skilful dancers do not often
       possess it, was hers; that elastic gait that is so winning, and so often denotes the gaiety
       and quickness of the spirit.
The fair object of his observation had advanced into other chambers, and as soon as it was
       becoming, Coningsby followed her. She had joined a lady and gentleman, who were examining an
       ancient carving in ivory. The gentleman was middle-aged and portly; the elder lady tall and
       elegant, and with traces of interesting beauty. Coningsby heard her speak; the words were
       English, but the accent not of a native.
In the remotest part of the room, Coningsby apparently engaged in examining some of that
       famous Limoges ware of which Sidonia had spoken, watched with interest and intentness the
       beautiful being whom he had followed, and whom he concluded to be the child of her
       companions. After some little time, they quitted the apartment on their return to the
       gallery; Coningsby remained behind, caring for none
        of the rare and fanciful objects that surrounded him, yet compelled, from the
       fear of seeming obtrusive, for some minutes to remain. Then he too returned to the gallery,
       and just as he had gained its end, he saw the portly gentleman in the distance shaking hands
       with Sidonia, the ladies apparently expressing their thanks and gratification to M. P—s, and
       then all vanishing by the door through which Coningsby had originally entered.
"What a beautiful countrywoman of yours!" said M. P—s, as Coningsby approached him.
"Is she my countrywoman! I am glad to hear it; I have been admiring her," he replied.
"Yes," said M. P—s, "it is Sir Wallinger; one of your deputies; don't you know him?"
"Sir Wallinger!" said Coningsby, "no, I have not that honour." He looked at Sidonia.
"Sir Joseph Wallinger," said Sidonia, "one of the new Whig baronets, and member for—.
        I know him. He married a Spaniard. That is not his daughter but his niece; the
       child of his wife's sister. It is not easy to find any one more beautiful."
END OF VOL. II.

