
CHAPTER I.
It was one of those gorgeous and enduring sunsets that seem to linger as if they
       wished to celebrate the mid period of the year. Perhaps the beautiful hour of impending
       twilight never exercises a more effective influence on the soul than when it descends on the
       aspect of some distant and splendid city. What a contrast between the serenity and repose of
       our own bosoms, and the fierce passions and destructive cares girt in the walls of that
       multitude, whose
        domes and towers rise in purple lustre against the resplendent horizon!
And yet the disturbing emotions of existence and the bitter inheritance of humanity, should
       exercise but a modified sway and entail but a light burden, within the circle of the city in
       which the next scene of our history leads us. For it is the sacred city of Study, of
       Learning, and of Faith; and the declining beam is resting on the dome of the Radcliffe,
       lingering on the towers of Christchurch and Magdalen, sanctifying the spires and pinnacles of
       holy St. Mary's.
A young Oxonian, who had been watching for some time the city in the sunset from a rising
       ground in its vicinity, lost, as it would seem, in meditation, suddenly rose and looking at
       his watch as if remindful of some engagement, hastened his return at a rapid pace. He reached
       the High Street, as the Blenheim light post coach dashed up to the Star Hotel, with that
       brilliant precision which even the New Generation can remember, and yet which already ranks
       among the traditions of English manners. A peculiar and most animating spectacle used
        to be the arrival of a first-rate light coach in a country town! The small
       machine crowded with so many passengers, the foaming and curvetting leaders, the wheelers
       more steady, and glossy as if they had not done their ten miles in the hour, the triumphant
       bugle of the guard, and the haughty routine with which the driver, as he reached his goal,
       threw his whip to the obedient ostlers in attendance; and not least the staring crowd, a
       little awe-struck, and looking for the moment at the lowest official of the stable with
       considerable respect; altogether made a picture which one recollects with cheerfulness, and
       misses now in many a dreary market town.
Our Oxonian was a young man about the middle height, and naturally of a very thoughtful
       expression and rather reserved mien. The general character of his countenance was indeed a
       little stern, but it broke into an almost bewitching smile, and a blush suffused his face, as
       he sprang forward and welcomed an individual about the same age, who had jumped off the
       Blenheim.

"Well, Coningsby!" he exclaimed, extending both his hands.
"By Jove, my dear Millbank, we have met at last," said his friend.
And here we must for a moment revert to what had occurred to Coningsby since he so suddenly
       quitted Paris at the beginning of the year. The wound he had received was deep to one unused
       to wounds. Yet after all, none had outraged his feeling, no one had betrayed his hopes. He
       had loved one who had loved another. Misery, but scarcely humiliation. And yet 'tis a bitter
       pang under any circumstances to find another preferred to yourself. It is about the same blow
       as one would probably feel if falling from a balloon. Your Icarian flight melts into a very
       grovelling existence, scarcely superior to that of a sponge or a coral, or redeemed only from
       utter insensibility by your very frank detestation of your rival. It is quite impossible to
       conceal that Coningsby had imbibed for Sidonia a certain degree of aversion, which in these
       days of exaggerated phrase might even be described as hatred. And Edith was so
        beautiful! And there had seemed between them a sympathy so native and
       spontaneous, creating at once the charm of intimacy without any of the disenchanting
       attributes, that are occasionally its consequence. He would recall the tones of her voice,
       the expression of her soft dark eye, the airy spirit and frank graciousness, sometimes even
       the flattering blush, with which she had ever welcomed one of whom she had heard so long and
       so kindly. It seemed, to use a sweet and homely phrase, that they were made for each other;
       the circumstances of their mutual destinies might have combined into one enchanting fate.
And yet had she accorded him that peerless boon, her heart—with what aspect was he to
       communicate this consummation of all his hopes to his grandfather, ask Lord Monmouth for his
       blessing, and the gracious favour of an establishment for the daughter of his foe; of a man
       whose name was never mentioned except to cloud his visage. Ah! what was that mystery that
       connected the haughty house of Coningsby with the humble blood of the Lancashire
        manufacturer? Why was the portrait of his mother beneath the roof of Millbank?
       Coningsby had delicately touched upon the subject both with Edith and the Wallingers, but the
       result of his inquiries only involved the question in deeper gloom. Edith had none but
       maternal relatives; more than once she had mentioned this, and the Wallingers on other
       occasions had confirmed the remark. Coningsby had sometimes drawn the conversation to
       pictures, and he would remind her with playfulness of their first unconscious meeting in the
       gallery of the Rue Tronchet; then he remembered that Mr. Millbank was fond of pictures; then
       he recollected some specimens of Mr. Millbank's collection, and after touching on several
       which could not excite suspicion, he came to "a portrait, a portrait of a lady; was it a
       portrait, or an ideal countenance?"
Edith thought she had heard it was a portrait, but she was by no means certain; and most
       assuredly was quite unacquainted with the name of the original, if there were an
       original.
Coningsby addressed himself to the point
        with Sir Joseph. He inquired of the uncle explicity, whether he knew anything on
       the subject. Sir Joseph was of opinion that it was something that Millbank had somewhere
       "picked up." Millbank used often to "pick up" pictures.
Disappointed in his love, Coningsby sought refuge in the excitement of study, and in the
       brooding imagination of an aspiring spirit. The softness of his heart seemed to have quitted
       him for ever. He recurred to his habitual reveries of political greatness and public
       distinction. And as it ever seemed to him, that no preparation could be complete for the
       career which he planned for himself, he devoted himself with increased ardour to that
       digestion of knowledge which converts it into wisdom. His life at Cambridge was now a life of
       seclusion. With the exception of a very few Eton friends he avoided all society. And indeed
       his acquisitions during this term were such as few have equalled, and could only have been
       mastered by a mental discipline of a severe and exalted character. At the end of the term
       Coningsby took his
        degree, and in a few days was about to quit that University where on the whole
       he had passed three serene and happy years, in the society of fond and faithful friends, and
       in ennobling pursuits. He had many plans for his impending movements, yet none of them very
       mature ones. Lord Vere wished Coningsby to visit his family in the north, and afterwards to
       go to Scotland together; Coningsby was more inclined to travel for a year. Amid this
       hesitation, a circumstance occurred which decided him to adopt neither of these courses.
It was Commencement, and coming out of the quadrangle of St. John's, Coningsby came
       suddenly upon Sir Joseph and Lady Wallinger, who were visiting the marvels and rarities of
       the University. They were alone. Coningsby was a little embarrassed, for he could not forget
       the abrupt manner in which he had parted from them; but they greeted him with so much
       cordiality that he instantly recovered himself, and turning became their companion. He hardly
       ventured to ask after Edith; at length in
        a depressed tone and a hesitating manner he inquired whether they had lately
       seen Miss Millbank. He was himself surprised at the extreme light-heartedness which came over
       him the moment he heard she was in England, at Millbank, with her family. He always very much
       liked Lady Wallinger; but this morning he hung over her like a lover, lavished on her
       unceasing and the most delicate attentions, seemed to exist only in the idea of making the
       Wallingers enjoy and understand Cambridge; no one else was to be their guide at any place, or
       under any circumstances. He told them exactly what they were to see; how they were to see it;
       when they were to see it. He told them of things which nobody did see; but which they should.
       He insisted that Sir Joseph should dine with him in Hall; Sir Joseph could not think of
       leaving Lady Wallinger; Lady Wallinger could not think of Sir Joseph missing an opportunity
       that might never offer again. Besides they might both join her after dinner. Except to give
       her husband a dinner, Coningsby
        evidently intended never to leave her side.
And the next morning, the occasion favourable, being alone with the lady, Sir Joseph
       bustling about a carriage, Coningsby said suddenly with a countenance a little disturbed, and
       in a low voice, "I was pleased, I mean surprised to hear that there was still a Miss
       Millbank; I thought by this time she might have borne another name?"
Lady Wallinger looked at him with an expression of some perplexity, and then said, "Yes,
       Edith was very much admired; but she need not be precipitate in marrying. Marriage is for a
       woman the event. Edith is too precious to be carelessly bestowed."
"But I understood," said Coningsby, "when I left Paris," and here he became very confused,
       "that Miss Millbank was engaged, on the point of marriage."
"With whom?"
"Our friend, Sidonia."
"I am sure that Edith would never marry Monsieur de Sidonia, nor Monsieur de Sidonia,
        Edith. 'Tis a preposterous idea," said Lady Wallinger.
"But he very much admired her?" said Coningsby with a searching eye.
"Possibly," said Lady Wallinger, "but he never even intimated his admiration."
"But he was very attentive to Miss Millbank?"
"Not more than our intimate friendship authorised, and might expect."
"You have known Sidonia a long time?"
"It was Monsieur de Sidonia's father who introduced us to the care of Mr. Wallinger," said
       Lady Wallinger, "and therefore I have ever entertained for his son a most sincere regard.
       Besides I look upon him as a compatriot. Recently he has been even more than usually kind to
       us,—especially to Edith. While we were at Paris he recovered for her a great number of jewels
       which had been left to her by her uncle in Spain, and, what she prized infinitely more, the
       whole of her mother's correspondence which she maintained with this relative since her
       marriage. Nothing but the
        influence of Sidonia could have effected this. Therefore of course Edith is
       attached to him, almost as much as I am. In short, he is our dearest friend; our counsellor
       in all our cares. But as for marrying him, the idea is ridiculous to those who know Monsieur
       Sidonia. No earthly consideration would ever induce him to impair that purity of race on
       which he prides himself. Besides there are other obvious objections, which would render an
       alliance between him and my niece utterly impossible; Edith is quite as devoted to her
       religion as Monsieur Sidonia can be to his race."
A ray of light flashed on the brain of Coningsby, as Lady Wallinger said these words. The
       agitated interview, which never could be explained away, already appeared in quite a
       different point of view. He became pensive, remained silent, was relieved when Sir Joseph,
       whose return he had hitherto deprecated, reappeared. Coningsby learnt in the course of the
       day, that the Wallingers were about to make, and immediately, a visit to Hellingsley; their
       first visit; indeed this was the first year
        that Mr. Millbank had taken up his abode there. He did not much like the change
       of life Sir Joseph told Coningsby, but Edith was delighted with Hellingsley, which Sir Joseph
       understood was a very distinguished place, with very fine gardens of which his niece was
       particularly fond.
When Coningsby returned to his rooms, those rooms which he was soon about to quit for ever,
       in arranging some papers preparatory to his removal, his eye lighted on a too long unanswered
       letter of Oswald Millbank. Coningsby had often projected a visit to Oxford, which he much
       desired to make, but hitherto it had been impossible for him to effect it except in the
       absence of Millbank; and he had frequently postponed it, that he might combine his first
       visit to that famous seat of learning with one to his old schoolfellow and friend. Now that
       was practical. And immediately Coningsby wrote to apprize Millbank that he had taken his
       degree, was free, and prepared to pay to him immediately the long projected visit. Three
       years and more had elapsed since they
        had quitted Eton. How much had happened in the interval! What new ideas, new
       feelings, vast and novel knowledge! Though they had not met, they were nevertheless familiar
       with the progress and movement of each other's minds. Their suggestive correspondence was too
       valuable to both of them to have been otherwise than cherished. And now they were to meet, on
       the eve of entering that world for which they had made so sedulous a preparation.

