
CHAPTER XI.
At dinner Coningsby was seated on the same side as Sidonia, and distant from him.
       There had been therefore no mutual recognition. Another guest had also arrived, Mr. Ormsby.
       He came straight from London, full of rumours, had seen Tadpole, who hearing he was on the
       wing for Coningsby Castle, had taken him into a dark corner of his club, and shown him his
       book, a very safe piece of confidence as Mr. Ormsby was very near-sighted. It was however to
       be received as an undoubted fact, that all was right, and somehow or other, before very long,
       there would be national demonstration of the same. This arrival of Mr. Ormsby and the news
       that he
        bore, gave a political turn to the conversation after the ladies had left the
       room.
"Tadpole wants me to stand for Birmingham," said Mr. Ormsby, gravely.
"You!" exclaimed Lord Monmouth, and throwing himself back in his chair, he broke into a
       real, hearty laugh.
"Yes; the Conservatives mean to start two candidates; a manufacturer they have got, and
       they have written up to Tadpole for a "Westend man."
"A what?"
"A West-end man, who will make the ladies patronise their fancy articles."
"The result of the Reform Bill then," said Lucian Gay, "will be to give Manchester a
       bishop, and Birmingham a dandy."
"I begin to believe the result will be very different to what we expected," said Lord
       Monmouth.
Mr. Rigby shook his head and was going to prophesy, when Lord Eskdale, who liked talk to be
       short, and was of opinion that Rigby should keep his amplifications for his slashing
       articles,
        put in a brief careless observation, which baulked his inspiration.
"Certainly," said Mr. Ormsby, "when the guns were firing over Vyvyan's last speech and
       confession, I never expected to be asked to stand for Birmingham."
"Perhaps you may be called up to the other house by the title," said Lucian Gay. "Who
       knows?"
"I agree with Tadpole," said Mr. Ormsby, "that if we only stick to the Registration, the
       country is saved."
"Fortunate country!" said Sidonia, "that can be saved by a good registration!"
"I believe after all that with property and pluck," said Lord Monmouth, "Parliamentary
       Reform is not such a very bad thing."
Here several gentlemen began talking at the same time, all agreeing with their host and
       proving in their different ways, the irresistible influence of property and pluck;—property
       in Lord Monmouth's mind meaning vassals; and pluck, a total disregard for public opinion. Mr.
       Guy Flouncey, who wanted to get into parliament,
        but why nobody knew, who had neither political abilities, nor political
       opinions, but had some floating idea that it would get himself and his wife to some more
       balls and dinners, and who was duly ticketed for "a good thing" in the candidate list of the
       Tadpoles and the Tapers, was of opinion that an immense deal might be done by properly
       patronising borough races. That was his specific how to prevent revolution.
Taking advantage of a pause, Lord Monmouth said, "I should like to know what you think of
       this question, Sidonia."
"I am scarcely a competent judge," he said as if wishing to disclaim any interference in
       the conversation, and then added, "but I have been ever of opinion that revolutions are not
       to be evaded."
"Exactly my views," said Mr. Rigby eagerly, "I say it now, I have said it a thousand times,
       you may doctor the registration as you like, but you can never get rid of Schedule A."
"Is there a person in this room who can now
        tell us the names of the boroughs in Schedule A?" said Sidonia.
"I am sure I cannot," said Lord Monmouth, "though six of them belonged to myself."
"But the principle," said Mr. Rigby, "they represented a principle."
"Nothing else certainly," said Lucian Gay.
"And what principle?" inquired Sidonia.
"The principle of nomination."
"That is a practice, not a principle," said Sidonia. "Is it a practice that no longer
       exists?"
"You think then," said Lord Eskdale cutting in before Rigby, "that the Reform Bill has done
       us no harm?"
"It is not the Reform Bill that has shaken the aristocracy of this country, but the means
       by which that Bill was carried," replied Sidonia.
"Physical force?" said Lord Eskdale.
"Or social power?" said Sidonia.
Upon this, Mr. Rigby impatient at any one giving the tone in a political discussion but
       himself, and chafing under the vigilance of Lord Eskdale which to him ever appeared only
        fortuitous, violently assaulted the argument, and astonished several country
       gentlemen present by his volubility. They at length listened to real eloquence. At the end of
       a long appeal to Sidonia, that gentleman only bowed his head, and said, "Perhaps;" and then
       turning to his neighbour, inquired whether birds were plentiful in Lancashire this season; so
       that Mr. Rigby was reduced to the necessity of forming the political opinions of Mr. Guy
       Flouncey.
As the gentlemen left the dining-room, Coningsby though at some distance was observed by
       Sidonia, who stopped instantly, then advanced to Coningsby and extending his hand, said, "I
       said we should meet again, though I hardly expected so quickly."
"And I hope we shall not separate so soon," said Coningsby; "I was much struck with what
       you said just now about the Reform Bill. Do you know that the more I think, the more I am
       perplexed by what is meant by Representation."
"It is a principle of which a limited definition is only current in this country," said
       Sidonia
        quitting the room with him. "People may be represented without periodical
       elections of neighbours who are incapable to maintain their interests, and strangers who are
       unwilling."
The entrance of the gentlemen produced the same effect on the saloon as sunrise on the
       world; universal animation, a general though gentle stir. The Archduke bowing to every one,
       devoted himself to the daughter of Lady St. Julians, who herself pinned Lord Beaumanoir
       before he could reach Mr. Guy Flouncey. Coningsby instead talked nonsense to that lady.
       Brilliant cavaliers including Mr. Melton, addressed a band of beautiful damsels grouped on a
       large ottoman. Everywhere sounded a delicious murmur, broken occasionally by a
       silver-sounding laugh not too loud. Sidonia and Lord Eskdale did not join the ladies. They
       stood for a few moments in conversation, and then threw themselves on a sofa.
"Who is that?" asked Sidonia of his companion rather earnestly, as Coningsby quitted
       them.

"'Tis the grandson of Monmouth; young Coningsby."
"Ah! The new generation then promises. I met him once before, by chance; he interests
       me."
"They tell me he is a lively lad. He is a prodigious favourite here, and I should not be
       surprised if Monmouth made him his heir."
"I hope he does not dream of inheritances," said Sidonia. "'Tis the most enervating of
       visions."
"Do you admire Lady Augustina St. Julians?" said Mrs. Guy Flouncey to Coningsby.
"I admire no one except yourself."
"Oh! how very gallant, Mr. Coningsby!"
"When should men be gallant, if not to the brilliant and the beautiful!" said
       Coningsby.
"Ah! you are laughing at me."
"No, I am not. I am quite grave."
"Your eyes laugh. Now tell me, Mr. Coningsby, Lord Henry Sydney is a very great friend of
       yours?"
"Very."

"He is very amiable?"
"Very."
"He does a great deal for the poor at Beaumanoir? A very fine place is it not?"
"Very."
"As fine as Coningsby?"
"At present with Mrs. Guy Flouncey at Coningsby, Beaumanoir would have no chance."
"Ah! you laugh at me again! Now tell me, Mr. Coningsby, what do you think we shall do
       to-night? I look upon you, you know, as the real arbiter of our destinies."
"You shall decide," said Coningsby.
"Mon cher Harry," said Madame Colonna coming up; "they wish Lucretia to sing, and she will
       not. You must ask her, she cannot refuse you."
"I assure you she can," said Coningsby.
"Mon cher Harry, your grandpapa did desire me to beg you to ask her to sing."
So Coningsby unwillingly approached Lucretia who was talking with the Russian
       Ambassador.

"I am sent upon a fruitless mission," said Coningsby looking at her, and catching her
       glance.
"What and why?" she replied.
"The mission is to entreat you to do us all a great favour; and the cause of its failure
       will be, that I am the envoy."
"If the favour be one to yourself, it is granted; and if you be the envoy, you need never
       fear failure with me."
"I must presume then to lead you away," said Coningsby bending to the Ambassador.
"Remember," said Lucretia as they approached the instrument, "that I am singing to
       you."
"It is impossible ever to forget it," said Coningsby leading her to the piano with great
       politeness, but only with great politeness.
"Where is Mademoiselle Flora?" she inquired.
Coningsby found "La Petite" crouching as it were behind some furniture, and apparently
       looking over some music. She looked up as he approached, and a smile stole over her
        countenance. "I am come to ask a favour," he said, and he named his
       request.
"I will sing," she replied; "but only tell me what you like."
Coningsby felt the difference between the courtesy of the head and of the heart, as he
       contrasted the manner of Lucretia and Flora. Nothing could be more exquisitely gracious than
       the daughter of Colonna was to-night; Flora, on the contrary, was rather agitated and
       embarrassed; and did not express her readiness with half the facility and the grace of
       Lucretia; but Flora's arm trembled as Coningsby led her to the piano.
Meantime Lord Eskdale and Sidonia are in deep converse.
"Hah! that is a fine note!" said Sidonia, and he looked round. "Who is that singing? Some
       new protégée of Lord Monmouth?"
"'Tis the daughter of the Colonnas," said Lord Eskdale, "the Princess Lucretia."
"Why, she was not at dinner to-day."
"No, she was not there."
"My favourite voice; and of all, the rarest
        to be found. When I was a boy, it made me almost in love even with
       Pisaroni."
"Well, the Princess is scarcely more lovely. 'Tis a pity the plumage is not as beautiful as
       the note. She is plain."
"No; not plain with that brow."
"Well, I rather admire her myself," said Lord Eskdale. "She has fine points."
"Let us approach," said Sidonia.
The song ceased, Lord Eskdale advanced, made his compliments, and then said, "You were not
       at dinner to-day."
"Why should I be?" said the Princess.
"For our sakes, for mine, if not for your own," said Lord Eskdale, smiling. "Your absence
       has been remarked, and felt I assure you by others as well as myself. There is my friend
       Sidonia so enraptured with your thrilling tones, that he has abruptly closed a conversation
       which I have been long counting on. Do you know him? May I present him to you?"
And having obtained a consent not often conceded, Lord Eskdale looked round, and
        calling Sidonia, he presented his friend to the Princess.
"You are fond of music, Lord Eskdale tells me?" said Lucretia.
"When it is excellent," said Sidonia.
"But that is so rare," said the Princess.
"And precious as Paradise," said Sidonia. "As for indifferent music 'tis Purgatory; but
       when it is bad, for my part I feel myself—"
"Where?" said Lord Eskdale.
"In the last circle of the Inferno," said Sidonia.
Lord Eskdale turned to Flora.
"And in what circle do you place us who are here?" inquired the Princess of Sidonia.
"One too polished for his verse," replied her companion.
"You mean too insipid," said the Princess. "I wish that life were a little more
       Dantesque."
"There is not less treasure in the world," said Sidonia, "because we use paper currency;
       and there is not less passion than of old, though it is bon-ton to be tranquil."
"Do you think so?" said the Princess inquiringly,
        and then looking round the apartment. "Have these automata indeed souls?"
"Some of them," said Sidonia. "As many as would have had souls in the fourteenth
       century."
"I thought they were wound up every day," said the Princess.
"Some are self-impelling," said Sidonia.
"And you can tell at a glance?" inquired the Princess. "You are one of those who can read
       human nature?"
"'Tis a book open to all."
"But if they cannot read?"
"Those must be your automata."
"Lord Monmouth tells me you are a great traveller."
"I have not discovered a new world."
"But you have visited it?"
"It is getting old."
"I would sooner recall the old than discover the new," said the Princess.
"We have both of us cause," said Sidonia. "Our names are the names of the Past."

"I do not love a world of Utility," said the Princess.
"You prefer to be celebrated to being comfortable," said Sidonia.
"It seems to me that the world is withering under routine."
" 'Tis the inevitable lot of humanity," said Sidonia. "Man must ever be the slave of
       routine; but in old days it was a routine of great thoughts, and now it is a routine of
       little ones."
The evening glided on; the dance succeeded the song; the ladies were fast vanishing;
       Coningsby himself was meditating a movement, when the young Marquess as he passed him said,
       "Come to Lucian Gay's room; we are going to smoke a cigar."
This was a favourite haunt towards midnight of several of the younger members of the party
       at the castle who loved to find relaxation from the decorous gravities of polished life in
       the fumes of tobacco, the inspiration of whiskey toddy, and the infinite amusement of Lucian
       Gay's conversation and company. This was
        the genial hour when the good story gladdened, the pun flashed, and the song
       sparkled with jolly mirth or saucy mimicry. To-night, being Coningsby's initiation, there was
       a special general meeting of the Grumpy Club, in which everybody was to say the gayest things
       with the gravest face, and every laugh carried a forfeit. Lucian was the inimitable
       president. He told a tale for which he was famous, of "the very respectable county family who
       had been established in the shire for several generations, but who (it was a fact) had been
       ever distinguished by the strange and humiliating peculiarity of being born with sheeps'
       tails." The remarkable circumstances under which Lucian Gay had become acquainted with this
       fact; the traditionary mysteries by which the family in question had succeeded for
       generations in keeping it secret; the decided measures to which the chief of the family had
       recourse to stop for ever the rumour when it first became prevalent; and finally the origin
       and result of the legend; were details which Lucian Gay with the most rueful countenance
       loved to expend upon the
        attentive and expanding intelligence of a new member of the Grumpy Club.
       Familiar as all present were with the story whose stimulus of agonizing risibility they had
       all in turn experienced, it was with extreme difficulty that any of them could resist the
       fatal explosion which was to be attended with the dreaded penalty. The Marquess looked on the
       table with desperate seriousness, an ominous pucker quivering round his lip; Mr. Melton
       crammed his handkerchief into his mouth with one hand, while he lighted the wrong end of a
       cigar with the other; one youth hung over the back of his chair pinching himself like a
       faquir, while another hid his countenance on the table.
"It was at the Hunt dinner," continued Lucian Gay in an almost solemn tone, "that an idea
       for a moment was prevalent that Sir Mowbray Cholmondeley Fetherstonehaugh, as the head of the
       family, had resolved to terminate for ever these mysterious aspersions on his race that had
       circulated in the county for more than two centuries; I mean that the highly respectable
       family of the Cholmondeley Fetherstonehaughs
        had the misfortune to be graced with that appendage to which I have referred.
       His health being drunk, Sir Mowbray Cholmondeley Fetherstonehaugh rose. He was a little
       unpopular at the moment from an ugly story about killing foxes, and the guests were not as
       quiet as orators generally desire, so the Honourable Baronet prayed particular attention to a
       matter personal to himself. Instantly there was a dead silence—" but here Coningsby, who had
       moved for sometime very restlessly on his chair suddenly started up, and struggling for a
       moment against the inward convulsion but in vain, stamped against the floor and gave a
       shout.
"A song from Mr. Coningsby," said the president of the Grumpy Club amid an universal and
       now permissible roar of laughter.
Coningsby could not sing; so he was to favour them as a substitute with a speech or a
       sentiment. But Lucian Gay always let one off these penalties easily, and indeed was ever
       ready to fulfil them for all. Song, speech, or sentiment, he poured them all forth; nor were
        pastimes more active wanting. He could dance a Tarantalla like a Lazaroni, and
       execute a Cracovienne with all the mincing graces of an Opera heroine.
His powers of mimicry indeed were great and versatile. But in nothing was he so happy as in
       a Parliamentary debate. And it was remarkable that, though himself a man who on ordinary
       occasions was quite incapable without infinite perplexity of publicly expressing his sense of
       the merest courtesy of society, he was not only a master of the style of every speaker of
       distinction in either house, but he seemed in his imitative play to appropriate their
       intellectual as well as their physical peculiarities, and presented you with their mind as
       well as their manner. There were several attempts to-night to induce Lucian to indulge his
       guests with a debate, but he seemed to avoid the exertion, which was great. As the night grew
       old however, and every hour he grew more lively, he suddenly broke without further pressure
       into the promised diversion; and Coningsby listened really with admiration to a discussion,
       of which the only fault was that it
        was more Parliamentary than the original; "plus Arabe que l'Arabie."
The Duke was never more curt, nor Sir Robert more specious; he was as fiery as Stanley, and
       as acrid as Graham. Nor did he do their opponents less justice. Lord Palmerston himself never
       treated a profound subject with a more pleasant volatility; and when Lucian rose at an early
       hour of morn, in a full house alike exhausted and excited, and after having endured for hours
       in sarcastic silence the menacing finger of Sir Robert shaking over the green table and
       appealing to his misdeeds in the irrevocable records of Hansard, Lord John himself could not
       have afforded a more perfect representative of pluck.
But loud as was the laughter, and vehement the cheering with which Lucian's performances
       were received, all these ebullitions sank into insignificance compared with the reception
       which greeted what he himself announced was to be the speech of the night. Having quaffed
       full many a quaigh of toddy, he insisted on delivering it on the table, a proposition with
       which his auditors immediately closed.

The orator appeared, the great man of the night, who was to answer everybody on both sides.
       Ah! that harsh voice, that arrogant style, that saucy superficiality which decided on
       everything, that insolent ignorance that contradicted everybody; it was impossible to mistake
       them! And Coningsby had the pleasure of seeing reproduced before him the guardian of his
       youth, and the patron of the mimic— the Right Honourable Nicholas Rigby!

