
CHAPTER IV.
It would have been difficult for any person, unconcious of crime, to have felt
       more dejected than Coningsby, when he rode out of the court- yard of Monmouth Houe. The love
       of Edith would have consoled him for the destruction of his prosperity; the proud fulfilment
       of his ambition might in time have proved some compensation for his crushed affections; but
       his present position seemed to offer no single source of solace. There came over him that
       irresistable conviction, that is at times the dark doom of all of us, that the bright period
       of our life is past; that a future awaits us only of anxiety, failure, mortification, depair;
       that none of our
        resplendent visions can be ever realized, and that we add but one more victim
       to the long and dreary catalogue of baffled aspirations.
Nor could he indeed by any combination see the means to extricate himself from the perils
       that were encompassing him. There was something about his grandfather that defied persuasion.
       Prone as eloquent youth generally is to believe in the resistless power of its appeals,
       Coningsby despaired at once of ever moving Lord Monmouth. There had been a callous dryness in
       his manner, an unswerving purpose in his spirit, that at once baffled all attempts at
       influence. Nor could Coningsby forget the glance he received when he quitted the room. There
       was no possibility of mistaking it; it said at once, without periphrasis, "Cross my purpose,
       and I will crush you."
This was the moment when the sympathy, if not the councils, of friendship might have been
       grateful. A clever woman might have afforded even more than sympathy; some happy device that
       might have even released him from the mesh in which he was involved. And once Coningsby had
       turned his horse's head to Park
        Lane to call on Lady Everingham. But surely if there were a sacred secret in
       the world, it was the one which subsisted between himself and Edith. No, that must never be
       violated. Then there was Lady Wallinger; he could at least speak with freedom to her. He
       resolved to tell her all. He looked in for a moment at a Club to take up the Court Guide and
       find her direction. A few men were standing in a bow window. He heard Mr. Cassilis say,
"So Beau they say is booked at last; the new beauty, have you heard?"
"I saw him very sweet on her last night," rejoined his companion. "Has she any tin?"
"Deuced deal they say," replied Mr. Cassilis. "The father's a Cotton Lord, and they all
       have loads of tin, you know. Nothing like them now."
"He is in Parliament, is not he?"
"'Gad I believe he is," said Mr. Cassilis, "I never know who is in Parliament in these
       days. I remember when there were only ten men in the House of Commons who were not either
       members of Brookes' or this place. Everything is so deuced changed."

"I hear 'tis an old affair of Beau," said another gentleman. "It was all done a year ago at
       Rome or Paris."
"They say she refused him then," said Mr. Cassilis.
"Well, that is tolerably cool for a manufacturer's daughter," said his friend, "what
       next?"
"I wonder how the Duke likes it," said Mr. Cassilis.
"Or the Duchess?" added one of his friends.
"Or the Everinghams?" added the other.
"The Duke will be deuced glad to see Beau settled, I take it," said Mr. Cassilis.
"A good deal depends on the tin," said his friend.
Coningsby threw down the Court Guide with a sinking heart. In spite of every insuperable
       difficulty, hitherto the end and object of all his aspirations and all his exploits,
       sometimes even almost unconsciously to himself, was to be Edith. It was over. The strange
       manner of last night was fatally explained. The heart that once had been his was now
       anothers. To the man who still loves there is in that conviction the most profound and
       desolate sorrow of which our
        nature is capable. All the recollections of the past, all the once cherished
       prospects of the future, blend into one bewildering anguish. Coningsby quitted the Club, and
       mounting his horse, rode rapidly out of town, almost unconscious of his direction. He found
       himself at length in a green lane near Willesden, silent and undisturbed; he pulled up his
       horse and he summoned all his mind to the contemplation of his prospects.
Edith was lost. Now, should he return to his grandfather, accept his mission, and go down
       to Darlford on Friday? Favour and fortune, power, prosperity, rank, distinction would be the
       consequence of this step. Might not he add even vengeance? Was there to be no term to his
       endurance? Might not he teach this proud prejudiced manufacturer, with all his virulence and
       despotic caprices, a memorable lesson? And his daughter too, this betrothed after all of a
       young noble, with her flush futurity of splendour and enjoyment, was she to hear of him only,
       if indeed she heard of him at all, as of one toiling or trifling in the humbler positions of
       existence; and wonder with a blush
        that he ever could have been the hero of her romantic girlhood! What
       degradation in the idea! His cheek burnt at the possibility of such ignominy!
It was a conjuncture in his life that required decision. He thought of his companions who
       looked up to him with such ardent anticipations of his fame, of delight in his career, and
       confidence in his leading; were all these high and fond fancies to be baulked? On the very
       threshold of life was he to blunder? 'Tis the first step that leads to all; and his was to be
       a wilful error. He remembered his first visit to his grandfather, and the delight of his
       friends at Eton at his report on his return. After eight years of initiation, was he to lose
       that favour then so highly prized, when the results which they had so long counted on, were
       on the very eve of accomplishment. Parliament and riches, and rank, and power—these were
       facts, realities, substances that none could mistake. Was he to sacrifice them for
       speculations, theories, shadows, perhaps the vapours of a green and conceited brain? No, by
       Heaven no; he was like Cæsar by the starry river's side,
        watching the image of the planets on its fatal waters. The die was cast.
The sun set; the twilight spell fell upon his soul; the exaltation of his spirit died away.
       Beautiful thoughts, full of sweetness and tranquillity and consolation, came clustering round
       his heart like seraphs. He thought of Edith in her hours of fondness; he thought of the pure
       and solemn moments when to mingle his name with the heroes of humanity was his aspiration,
       and to achieve immortal fame the inspiring purpose of his life. What were the tawdry
       accidents of vulgar ambition to him! No domestic despot could deprive him of his intellect,
       his knowledge, the sustaining power of an unpolluted conscience. If he possessed the
       intelligence in which he had confidence, the world would recognise his voice, even if not
       placed upon a pedestal. If the principles of his philosophy were true, the great heart of the
       nation would respond to their expression. Coningsby felt at this moment a profound conviction
       which never again deserted him, that the conduct which would violate the affections of the
       heart or the dictates of the conscience, however it may lead
        to immediate success, is a fatal error. Conscious that he was perhaps verging
       on some painful vicissitudes of his life, he devoted himself to a love that seemed hopeless,
       and to a fame that was perhaps a dream.
It was under the influence of these solemn resolutions, that he wrote on his return home, a
       letter to Lord Monmouth, in which he expressed all that affection, which he really felt for
       his grandfather, and all the pangs which it cost him to adhere to the conclusions he had
       already announced. In terms of tenderness and even humility he declined to become a candidate
       for Darlford, or even to enter Parliament except as the master of his own conduct.

