<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER I.</head>
<p>It was early in November, 1834, and a large shooting party was assembled at
       Beaumanoir, the seat of that great nobleman, who was the father of Henry Sydney. England is
       unrivalled for two things—sporting and politics. They were combined at Beaumanoir; for the
       guests came not merely to slaughter the Duke's pheasants, but to hold council on the
       prospects of the party, which, it was supposed by the initiated, began at this time to
       indicate some symptoms of brightening.</p>
<pb n="139"/>
<p>The success of the Reform Ministry on their first appeal to the new constituency which they
       had created, had been fatally complete. But the triumph was as destructive to the victors as
       to the vanquished.</p>
<p>"We are too strong," prophetically exclaimed one of the fortunate cabinet, which found
       itself supported by an inconceivable majority of three hundred. It is to be hoped that some
       future publisher of private memoirs may have preserved some of the traits of that crude and
       short-lived Parliament, when old Cobbett insolently thrust Sir Robert from the prescriptive
       seat of the chief of opposition, and treasury understrappers sneered at the "queer lot" that
       had arrived from Ireland, little foreseeing what a high bidding that "queer lot" would
       eventually command. Gratitude to Lord Grey was the hustings-cry at the end of 1832, the
       pretext that was to return to the new-modelled House of Commons none but men devoted to the
       Whig cause. The successful simulation, like everything that is false, carried within it the
       seeds of its own dissolution. Ingratitude to
       <pb n="140"/> Lord Grey was more the fashion at the commencement of 1834, and before the
       close of that eventful year, the once popular Reform Ministry was upset, and the eagerly
       sought Reformed Parliament dissolved!</p>
<p>It can scarcely be alleged that the public was altogether unprepared for this catastrophe.
       Many deemed it inevitable; few thought it imminent. The career of the Ministry, and the
       existence of the Parliament had indeed from the first been turbulent and fitful. It was known
       from authority, that there were dissensions in the cabinet; while a House of Commons which
       passed votes on subjects not less important than the repeal of a tax, or the impeachment of a
       judge on one night, and rescinded its resolutions on the following, certainly established no
       increased claims to the confidence of its constituents in its discretion. Nevertheless there
       existed at this period a prevalent conviction, that the Whig party by a great stroke of
       state, similar in magnitude and effect to that which in the preceding century had changed the
       dynasty, had secured
       <pb n="141"/> to themselves the government of this country, for, at least, the lives of the
       present generation. And even the well informed in such matters were inclined to look upon the
       perplexing circumstances to which we have alluded, rather as symptoms of a want of discipline
       in a new system of tactics, than as evidences of any essential and deeply-rooted
       disorder.</p>
<p>The startling rapidity, however, of the strange incidents of 1834; the indignant, soon to
       become vituperative, secession of a considerable section of the cabinet, some of them
       esteemed too at that time among its most efficient members; the piteous deprecation of
       "pressure from without," from lips hitherto deemed too stately for intreaty, followed by the
       Trades' Union thirty thousand strong, parading in procession to Downing Street; the Irish
       negociations of Lord Hatherton, strange blending of complex intrigue and almost infantile
       ingenuousness; the still inexplicable resignation of Lord Althorp, hurriedly followed by his
       still more mysterious resumption of power, the only result of his precipitate movements being
       the fall of Lord
       <pb n="142"/> Grey himself, attended by circumstances which even a friendly historian could
       scarcely describe as honourable to his party or dignified to himself; latterly, the
       extemporaneous address of King William to the bishops; the vagrant and grotesque Apocalypse
       of the Lord Chancellor; and the fierce recrimination and memorable defiance of the Edinburgh
       banquet; all these impressive instances of public affairs and public conduct had combined to
       create a predominant opinion that, whatever might be the consequences, the prolonged
       continuance of the present party in power was a clear impossibility.</p>
<p>It is evident that the suicidal career of what was then styled the Liberal party, had been
       occasioned and stimulated by its unnatural excess of strength. The apoplectic plethora of
       1834 was not less fatal than the paralytic tenuity of 1841. It was not feasible to gratify so
       many ambitions, or to satisfy so many expectations. Every man had his double; the heels of
       every placeman were dogged by friendly rivals ready to trip them up. There were even two
       cabinets; the one that met in council, and
       <pb n="143"/> the one that met in cabal. The consequence of destroying the legitimate
       opposition of the country was, that a moiety of the supporters of government had to discharge
       the duties of Opposition.</p>
<p>Herein then we detect the real cause of all that irregular and unsettled carriage of public
       men, which so perplexed the nation after the passing of the Reform Act. No government can be
       long secure without a formidable Opposition. It reduces their supporters to that tractable
       number which can be managed by the joint influences of fruition and of hope. It offers
       vengeance to the discontented and distinction to the ambitious; and employs the energies of
       aspiring spirits, who otherwise may prove traitors in a division, or assassins in a
       debate.</p>
<p>The general election of 1832 abrogated the Parliamentary Opposition of England, which had
       practically existed for more than a century and a half. And what a series of equivocal
       transactions and mortifying adventures did the withdrawal of this salutary restraint entail
       on the party which then so loudly congratulated themselves
       <pb n="144"/> and the country, that they were at length relieved from its odious repression!
       In the hurry of existence one is apt too generally to pass over the political history of the
       times in which we ourselves live. The two years that followed the Reform of the House of
       Commons are full of instruction on which a young man would do well to ponder. It is hardly
       possible that he could rise from the study of these annals without a confirmed disgust for
       political intrigue; a dazzling practice, apt at first to fascinate youth, for it appeals at
       once to our invention and our courage, but which really should only be the resource of the
       second-rate. Great minds must trust to great truths and great talents for their rise, and
       nothing else.</p>
<p>While, however, as the autumn of 1834 advanced, the people of this country became gradually
       sensible of the necessity of some change in the councils of their Sovereign; no man felt
       capable of predicting by what means it was to be accomplished, or from what quarry the new
       materials were to be extracted. The Tory party, according to these perverted views of
       <pb n="145"/> Toryism unhappily too long prevalent in this country, was held to be literally
       defunct, except by a few old battered crones of office crouched round the embers of faction
       which they were fanning, and muttering "re-action" in mystic whispers. It cannot be supposed,
       indeed, for a moment, that the distinguished personage who had led that party in the House of
       Commons previously to the passing of the act of 1832, ever despaired in consequence of his
       own career. His then time of life, the perfection, almost the prime, of manhood; his
       parliamentary practice, doubly estimable in an inexperienced assembly; his political
       knowledge; his fair character and reputable position; his talents and tone as a public
       speaker, which he had always aimed to adapt to the habits and culture of that middle class
       from which it was concluded the benches of the new Parliament were mainly to be recruited
       —all these were qualities, the possession of which must have assured a mind, not apt to be
       disturbed in its calculations by any intemperate heats, that with time and patience the game
       was yet for him.</p>
<pb n="146"/>
<p>Unquestionably, whatever may have been insinuated, this distinguished person had no inkling
       that his services in 1834 might be claimed by his Sovereign. At the close of the session of
       that year he had quitted England with his family and had arrived at Rome, where it was his
       intention to pass the winter. The party charges that have imputed to him a previous and
       sinister knowledge of the intentions of the Court, appear to have been made not only in
       ignorance of the personal character, but of the real position, of the future minister.</p>
<p>It had been the misfortune of this eminent gentleman when he first entered public life, to
       become identified with a political connexion, which having arrogated to itself the name of an
       illustrious historical party, pursued a policy, which was either founded on no principle
       whatever, or on principles exactly contrary to those which had always guided the conduct of
       the great Tory leaders. The chief members of this official confederacy were men distinguished
       by none of the conspicuous qualities of statesmen. They had none of the divine gifts that
       govern
       <pb n="147"/> senates and guide councils. They were not orators; they were not men of deep
       thought or happy resource; or of penetrative and sagacious minds. Their political ken was
       essentially dull and contracted. They expended some energy in obtaining a defective
       blundering acquaintance with foreign affairs; they knew as little of the real state of their
       own country as savages of an approaching eclipse. This factious league had shuffled
       themselves into power by clinging to the skirts of a great minister, the last of Tory
       statesmen, but who, in the unparalleled and confounding emergencies of his latter years, has
       been forced, unfortunately for England, to relinquish Toryism. His successors inherited all
       his errors without the latent genius, which in him might have still rallied and extricated
       him from the consequences of his disasters. His successors did not merely inherit his errors;
       they exaggerated, they caricatured them. They rode into power on a spring-tide of all the
       rampant prejudices and rancorous passions of their time. From the King to the boor their
       policy was a mere pandering to public ignorance.
       <pb n="148"/> Impudently usurping the name of that party of which nationality, and therefore
       universality, is the essence, these pseudo-Tories made Exclusion the principle of their
       political constitution, and Restriction the genius of their commercial code.</p>
<p>The blind goddess that plays with human fortunes has mixed up the memory of these men with
       traditions of national glory. They conducted to a prosperous conclusion the most renowned war
       in which England has ever been engaged. Yet every military conception that emanated from
       their cabinet was branded by their characteristic want of grandeur. Chance, however, sent
       them a great military genius, whom they treated for a long time with indifference; and whom
       they never heartily supported until his career had made him their master. His transcendent
       exploits and European events, even greater than his achievements, placed in the manikin grasp
       of the English ministry—the settlement of Europe.</p>
<p>The act of the Congress of Vienna remains the eternal monument of their diplomatic
       knowledge
       <pb n="149"/> and political sagacity. Their capital feats were the creation of two kingdoms,
       both of which are already erased from the map of Europe. They made no single preparation for
       the inevitable, almost impending, conjunctures of the East. All that remains of the pragmatic
       arrangements of the mighty Congress of Vienna is the mediatisation of the petty German
       Princes.</p>
<p>But the settlement of Europe by the pseudo-Tories was the dictate of inspiration compared
       with their settlement of England. The peace of Paris found the government of this country in
       the hands of a body of men, of whom it is no exaggeration to say that they were ignorant of
       every principle of every branch of political science. As long as our domestic administration
       was confined merely to the raising of a revenue, they levied taxes with gross facility from
       the industry of a country too busy to criticise or complain. But when the excitement and
       distraction of war had ceased, and they were forced to survey the social elements that
       surrounded them; they seemed, for the first time, to have become conscious of their own
       incapacity. These men,
       <pb n="150"/> indeed, were the mere children of routine. They prided themselves on being
       practical men. In the language of this defunct school of statesmen, a practical man is a man
       who practises the blunders of his predecessors.</p>
<p>Now commenced that Condition of England Question, of which our generation hears so much.
       During five-and-twenty years every influence that can develop the energies and resources of a
       nation had been acting with concentrated stimulation on the British Isles. National peril and
       national glory; the perpetual menace of invasion, the continual triumph of conquest; the most
       extensive foreign commerce that was ever conducted by a single nation; an illimitable
       currency; an internal trade supported by swarming millions, whom manufactures and inclosure
       bills summoned into existence; above all, the supreme control obtained by man over mechanic
       power; these are some of the causes of that rapid advance of material civilization in
       England, to which the annals of the world can afford no parallel. But there was no
       proportionate advance in our moral civilization. In the
       <pb n="151"/> hurry-skurry of money-making, men-making and machine-making, we had altogether
       outgrown, not the spirit, but the organization, of our institutions.</p>
<p>The peace came; the stimulating influences suddenly ceased; the people, in a novel and
       painful position, found themselves without guides. They went to the ministry; they asked to
       be guided; they asked to be governed. Commerce requested a code; trade required a currency;
       the unfranchised subject solicited his equal privilege; suffering labour clamoured for its
       rights; a new race demanded education. What did the ministry do?</p>
<p>They fell into a panic. Having fulfilled during their lives the duties of administration,
       they were frightened because they were called upon, for the first time, to perform the
       functions of government. Like all weak men, they had recourse to what they called strong
       measures. They determined to put down the multitude. They thought they were imitating Mr.
       Pitt, because they mistook disorganization for sedition.</p>
<pb n="152"/>
<p>Their projects of relief were as ridiculous as their system of coercion was ruthless; both
       were alike founded in intense ignorance. When we recall Mr. Vansittart with his currency
       resolutions; Lord Castlereagh with his plans for the employment of labour; and Lord Sidmouth
       with his plots for ensnaring the laborious; one is tempted to imagine that the present epoch
       has been one of peculiar advances in political ability, and marvel how England could have
       attained her present pitch under a series of such governors.</p>
<p>We should, however, be labouring under a very erroneous impression. Run over the statesmen
       that have figured in England since the accession of the present family, and we may doubt
       whether there be one, with the exception, perhaps, of the Duke of Newcastle, who would have
       been a worthy colleague of the councils of Mr. Percival, or the early cabinet of Lord
       Liverpool. Assuredly the genius of Bolingbroke and the sagacity of Walpole, would have alike
       recoiled from such men and such measures. And if we take the individuals who were governing
       <pb n="153"/> England immediately before the French Revolution, one need only refer to the
       speeches of Mr. Pitt, and especially to those of that profound statesman and most instructed
       man, Lord Shelburne, to find that we can boast no remarkable superiority either in political
       justice or in political economy. One must attribute this degeneracy, therefore, to the long
       war and our insular position, acting upon men naturally of inferior abilities, and
       unfortunately, in addition, of illiterate habits.</p>
<p>In the meantime, notwithstanding all the efforts of the political Panglosses who, in
       Evening Journals and Quarterly Reviews, were continually proving that this was the best of
       all possible governments, it was evident to the Ministry itself that the machine must stop.
       The class of Rigbys, indeed, at this period, one eminently favourable to that fungous tribe,
       greatly distinguished themselves. They demonstrated in a manner absolutely convincing, that
       it was impossible for any person to possess any ability, knowledge, or virtue, any capacity
       of reason, any ray of fancy or faculty of imagination,
       <pb n="154"/> who was not a supporter of the existing administration. If any one impeached
       the management of a department, the public was assured that the accuser had embezzled; if any
       one complained of the conduct of a colonial governor, the complainant was announced as a
       returned convict. An amelioration of the criminal code was discountenanced because a search
       in the parish register of an obscure village proved that the proposer had not been born in
       wedlock. A relaxation of the commercial system was denounced because one of its principal
       advocates was a Socinian. The inutility of Parliamentary Reform was ever obvious since Mr.
       Rigby was a Member of the House of Commons.</p>
<p>To us, with our "Times" newspaper every morning on our breakfast table, bringing on every
       subject which can interest the public mind a degree of information and intelligence which
       must form a security against any prolonged public misconception, it seems incredible that
       only five and twenty years ago the English mind could have been so ridden and hoodwinked,
       <pb n="155"/> and that too by men of mean attainments and moderate abilities. But the war had
       directed the energies of the English people into channels by no means favourable to political
       education. Conquerors of the world, with their ports filled with the shipping of every clime,
       and their manufactories supplying the European continent, in the art of self-government, that
       art in which their fathers excelled, they had become literally children; and Rigby and his
       brother hirelings were the nurses that frightened them with hideous fables and ugly
       words.</p>
<p>Notwithstanding, however, all this successful mystification, the Arch-Mediocrity who
       presided, rather than ruled, over this Cabinet of Mediocrities, became hourly more conscious
       that the inevitable transition from fulfilling the duties of an administration to performing
       the functions of a government could not be conducted without talents and knowledge. The
       Arch-Mediocrity had himself some glimmering traditions of political science. He was sprung
       from a laborious stock, had received some training, and
       <pb n="156"/> though not a statesman, might be classed among those whom the Lord Keeper
       Williams used to call "statemongers." In a subordinate position his meagre diligence and his
       frigid method might not have been without value; but the qualities that he possessed were
       misplaced; nor can any character be conceived less invested with the happy properties of a
       leader. In the conduct of public affairs, his disposition was exactly the reverse to that
       which is the characteristic of great men. He was peremptory in little questions, and great
       ones he left open.</p>
<p>In the natural course of events, in 1819 there ought to have been a change of government
       and another party in the state should have entered into office; but the Whigs, though they
       counted in their ranks at that period an unusual number of men of great ability and formed
       indeed a compact and spirited opposition, were unable to contend against the new adjustment
       of borough influence which had occurred during the war, and under the protracted
       administration by which that war had been conducted. New
       <pb n="157"/> families had arisen on the Tory side that almost rivalled old Newcastle himself
       in their electioneering management; and it was evident that unless some re-construction of
       the House of Commons could be effected, the Whig party could never obtain a permanent hold of
       official power. Hence, from that period, the Whigs became Parliamentary Reformers.</p>
<p>It was inevitable, therefore, that the country should be governed by the same party;
       indispensable that the ministry should be renovated by new brains and blood. Accordingly, a
       Mediocrity, not without repugnance, was induced to withdraw, and the great name of Wellington
       supplied his place in council. The talents of the Duke, as they were then understood, were
       not exactly of the kind most required by the cabinet, and his colleagues were most careful
       that he should not occupy too prominent a post; but still it was an impressive acquisition,
       and imparted to the ministry a semblance of renown.</p>
<p>There was an individual who had not long entered public life, but who had already filled
       considerable, though still subordinate, offices.
       <pb n="158"/> Having acquired a certain experience of the duties of administration and
       distinction for his mode of fulfilling them, he had withdrawn from his public charge; perhaps
       because he found it a barrier to the attainment of that parliamentary reputation for which he
       had already shown both a desire and a capacity; perhaps, because being young and independent,
       he was not over anxious irremediably to identify his career with a school of politics of the
       infallibility of which his experience might have already made him a little sceptical. But he
       possessed the talents that were absolutely wanted, and the terms were at his own dictation.
       Another and a very distinguished Mediocrity who would not resign, was thrust out; and Mr.
       Peel became Secretary of State.</p>
<p>From this moment dates that intimate connexion between the Duke of Wellington and the
       present First Minister, which has exercised a considerable influence over the career of
       individuals and the course of affairs. It was the sympathetic result of superior minds placed
       among inferior intelligences: and was, doubtless,
       <pb n="159"/> assisted by a then mutual conviction, that the difference of age, the
       circumstance of sitting in different houses, and the general contrast of their previous
       pursuits and accomplishments, rendered personal rivalry out of the question. From this
       moment, too, the domestic government of the country assumed a new character, and one
       universally admitted to have been distinguished by a spirit of enlightened progress and
       comprehensive amelioration.</p>
<p>A short time after this, a third and most distinguished Mediocrity died; and Canning, whom
       they had twice worried out of the cabinet, where they had tolerated him for some time in an
       obscure and ambiguous position, was recalled just in time from his impending banishment,
       installed in the first post in the lower House and intrusted with the seals of the Foreign
       Office. The Duke of Wellington had coveted them, nor could Lord Liverpool have been
       insensible to his Grace's peculiar fitness for such duties; but strength was required in the
       House of Commons, where they had only one Secretary of State, a young man already
       distinguished, yet untried as a leader
       <pb n="160"/> and surrounded by colleagues notoriously incapable to assist him in debate.</p>
<p>The accession of Mr. Canning to the cabinet, in a position too of surpassing influence,
       soon led to a further weeding of the Mediocrities, and among other introductions to the
       memorable entrance of Mr. Huskisson. In this wise did that cabinet, once notable only for the
       absence of all those qualities which authorize the possession of power, come to be generally
       esteemed as a body of men, who for parliamentary eloquence, official practice, political
       information, sagacity in council, and a due understanding of their epoch, were inferior to
       none that had directed the policy of the empire since the Revolution.</p>
<p>If we survey the tenour of the policy of the Liverpool Cabinet during the latter moiety of
       its continuance, we shall find its characteristic to be a partial recurrence to those frank
       principles of government which Mr. Pitt had revived during the latter part of the last
       century from precedents that had been set us, either in practice or in dogma, during its
       earlier period by statesmen, who then not only bore the title, but professed
       <pb n="161"/> the opinions, of Tories. Exclusive principles in the constitution and
       restrictive principles in commerce have grown up together; and have really nothing in common
       with the ancient character of our political settlement, or the manners and customs of the
       English people. Confidence in the loyalty of the nation, testified by munificent grants of
       rights and franchises, and favour to an expansive system of traffic, were distinctive
       qualities of the English sovereignty, until the House of Commons usurped the better portion
       of its prerogatives. A widening of our electoral scheme, great facilities to commerce, and
       the rescue of our Roman Catholic fellow-subjects from the Puritanic yoke, from fetters which
       have been fastened on them by English Parliaments in spite of the protests and exertions of
       English Sovereigns; these were the three great elements and fundamental truths of the real
       Pitt system—a system founded on the traditions of our monarchy, and caught from the writings,
       the speeches, the councils, of those who, for the sake of these and analogous benefits, had
       ever been anxious that the Sovereign of
       <pb n="162"/> England should never be degraded into the position of a Venetian Doge.</p>
<p>It is in the plunder of the Church that we must seek for the primary cause of our political
       exclusion, and our commercial restraint. That unhallowed booty created a factitious
       aristocracy, ever fearful that they might be called upon to re-gorge their sacrilegious
       spoil. To prevent this they took refuge in political religionism, and paltering with the
       disturbed consciences or the pious fantasies of a portion of the people, they organized them
       into religious sects. These became the unconscious Proetorians of their ill-gotten domains.
       At the head of these religionists, they have continued ever since to govern, or powerfully to
       influence, this country. They have in that time pulled down thrones and churches, changed
       dynasties, abrogated and remodelled parliaments; they have disfranchised Scotland, and
       confiscated Ireland. One may admire the vigour and consistency of the Whig party, and
       recognise in their career that unity of purpose that can only spring from a great principle;
       but the Whigs introduced sectarian
       <pb n="163"/> religion, sectarian religion led to political exclusion, and political
       exclusion was soon accompanied by commercial restraint.</p>
<p>It would be fanciful to assume that the Liverpool Cabinet, in their ameliorating career,
       was directed by any desire to recur to the primordial tenets of the Tory party. That was not
       an epoch when statesmen cared to prosecute the investigation of principles. It was a period
       of happy and enlightened practice. A profounder policy is the offspring of a time like the
       present, when the original postulates of institutions are called in question. The Liverpool
       Cabinet unconsciously approximated to these opinions, because from careful experiment they
       were convinced of their beneficial tendency, and they thus bore an unintentional and
       impartial testimony to their truth. Like many men, who think they are inventors, they were
       only reproducing ancient wisdom.</p>
<p>But one must ever deplore that this ministry, with all their talents and generous ardour,
       did not advance to principles. It is always perilous to adopt expediency as a guide; but the
       choice
       <pb n="164"/> may be sometimes imperative. But these statesmen took expediency for their
       director, when principle would have given them all that expediency insured, and much
       more.</p>
<p>This ministry, strong in the confidence of the sovereign, the parliament, and the people,
       might, by the courageous promulgation of great historical truths, have gradually formed a
       public opinion, that would have permitted them to organize the Tory party on a broad, a
       permanent and national basis. They might have nobly effected a complete settlement of
       Ireland, which a shattered section of this very cabinet was forced a few years after to do
       partially, and in an equivocating and equivocal manner. They might have concluded a
       satisfactory re-construction of the third estate, without producing that convulsion with
       which from its violent fabrication our social system still vibrates. Lastly, they might have
       adjusted the rights and properties of our national industries in a manner which would have
       prevented that fierce and fatal rivalry that is now disturbing every hearth of the United
       Kingdom.</p>
<pb n="165"/>
<p>We may therefore visit on the laches of this ministry the introduction of that new
       principle and power into our constitution which ultimately may absorb all— <hi>Agitation</hi>
       . This Cabinet then, with so much brilliancy on its surface, is the real parent of the Roman
       Catholic Association, the Political Unions, the Anti-Corn Law League.</p>
<p>There is no influence at the same time so powerful and so singular as that of individual
       character. It arises as often from the weakness of the character as from its strength. The
       dispersion of this clever and showy ministry is a fine illustration of this truth. One
       morning the Arch-Mediocrity himself died. At the first blush, it would seem that little
       difficulty could be experienced in finding his substitute. His long occupation of the post,
       proved at any rate that the qualification was not excessive. But this cabinet with its serene
       and blooming visage had been all this time charged with fierce and emulous ambitions. They
       waited the signal, but they waited in grim repose. The death of the nominal leader, whose
       formal superiority,
       <pb n="166"/> wounding no vanity and offending no pride, secured in their councils equality
       among the able, was the tocsin of their anarchy. There existed in this Cabinet two men, who
       were resolved immediately to be prime ministers; a third who was resolved eventually to be
       prime minister, but would, at any rate occupy no ministerial post, without the lead of a
       House of Parliament; and a fourth, who felt himself capable of being prime minister, but
       despaired of the revolution which could alone make him one; and who found an untimely end
       when that revolution had arrived.</p>
<p>Had Mr. Secretary Canning remained leader of the House of Commons under the Duke of
       Wellington, all that he gained by the death of Lord Liverpool was a master. Had the Duke of
       Wellington become Secretary of State under Mr. Canning, he would have materially advanced his
       political position, not only by holding the seals of a high department in which he was
       calculated to excel, but by becoming leader of the House of Lords. But his Grace was induced
       by certain court intriguers to believe that
       <pb n="167"/> the King would send for him, and he was also aware that Mr. Peel would no
       longer serve under any minister in the House of Commons. Under any circumstances it would
       have been impossible to keep the Liverpool Cabinet together. The struggle therefore between
       the Duke of Wellington and "my dear Mr. Canning," was internecine, and ended somewhat
       unexpectedly.</p>
<p>And here we must stop to do justice to our friend Mr. Rigby, whose conduct on this occasion
       was distinguished by a bustling dexterity which was quite charming. He had, as we have before
       intimated, on the credit of some clever lampoons written during the Queen's trial, which were
       in fact the effusions of Lucian Gay, wriggled himself into a sort of occasional unworthy
       favour at the palace, where he was half butt and half buffoon. Here, during the interregnum
       occasioned by the death, or rather inevitable retirement, of Lord Liverpool, Mr. Rigby
       contrived to scrape up a conviction that the Duke was the winning horse, and in consequence
       there appeared a series of leading
       <pb n="168"/> articles in a notorious evening newspaper in which it was, as Tadpole and Taper
       declared, most "slashingly" shown, that the son of an actress could never be tolerated as the
       Prime Minister of England. Not content with this, and never doubting for a moment the
       authentic basis of his persuasion, Mr. Rigby poured forth his coarse volubility on the
       subject at several of the new clubs which he was getting up in order to revenge himself for
       having been black-balled at Whites'.</p>
<p>What with arrangements about Lord Monmouth's boroughs, and the lucky bottling of some
       claret which the Duke had imported on Mr. Rigby's recommendation, this distinguished
       gentleman contrived to pay almost hourly visits at Apsley House, and so bullied Tadpole and
       Taper that they scarcely dared address him. About four and twenty hours before the result,
       and when it was generally supposed that the Duke was in, Mr. Rigby, who had gone down to
       Windsor to ask his Majesty the date of some obscure historical incident, which Rigby of
       course very well knew, found that audiences were impossible,
       <pb n="169"/> that his Majesty was agitated, and learned from an humble, but secure
       authority, that in spite of all his slashing articles and Lucian Gay's parodies of the Irish
       melodies, Canning was to be Prime Minister.</p>
<p>This would seem something of a predicament to common minds; there are no such things as
       scrapes for gentlemen with Mr. Rigby's talents for action. He had indeed in the world the
       credit of being an adept in machinations, and was supposed ever to be involved in profound
       and complicated contrivances. This was quite a mistake. There was nothing profound about Mr.
       Rigby; and his intellect was totally incapable of devising or sustaining an intricate or
       continuous scheme. He was indeed a man who neither felt nor thought; but who possessed in a
       very remarkable degree a restless instinct for adroit baseness. On the present occasion, he
       got into his carriage and drove at the utmost speed from Windsor to the Foreign Office, The
       Secretary of State was engaged when he arrived; but Mr. Rigby would listen to no
       difficulties. He rushed up stairs, flung open
       <pb n="170"/> the door, and with agitated countenance, and eyes suffused with tears, threw
       himself into the arms of the astonished Mr. Canning.</p>
<p>"All is right," exclaimed the devoted Rigby, in broken tones; "I have convinced the King
       that the First Minister must be in the House of Commons. No one knows it but myself; but it
       is certain."</p>
<p>We have seen that at an early period of his career, Mr. Peel withdrew from official life.
       His course had been one of unbroken prosperity; the hero of the University had become the
       favourite of the House of Commons. His retreat, therefore, was not prompted by chagrin. Nor
       need it to have been suggested by a calculating ambition, for the ordinary course of events
       was fast bearing to him all to which man could aspire. One might rather suppose, that he had
       already gained sufficient experience, perhaps in his Irish Secretaryship, to make him pause
       in that career of superficial success which education and custom had hitherto chalked out for
       him, rather than the creative energies of his own mind. A thoughtful intellect may have
       already
       <pb n="171"/> detected elements in our social system which required a finer observation, and
       a more unbroken study, than the gyves and trammels of office would permit. He may have
       discovered that the representation of the University, looked upon in those days as the blue
       ribbon of the House of Commons, was a sufficient fetter without unnecessarily adding to its
       restraint. He may have wished to reserve himself for a happier occasion, and a more
       progressive period. He may have felt the strong necessity of arresting himself in his rapid
       career of felicitous routine, to survey his position in calmness, and to comprehend the
       stirring age that was approaching.</p>
<p>For that he could not but be conscious that the education which he had consummated, however
       ornate and refined, was not sufficient. That age of economical statesmanship which Lord
       Shelburne had predicted in 1787, when he demolished in the House of Lords Bishop Watson and
       the Balance of Trade; which Mr. Pitt had comprehended, and for which he was preparing the
       nation when the French Revolution
       <pb n="172"/> diverted the public mind into a stronger and more turbulent current, was again
       impending, while the intervening history of the country had been prolific in events which had
       aggravated the necessity of investigating the sources of the wealth of nations. The time had
       arrived when parliamentary pre-eminence could no longer be achieved or maintained by gorgeous
       abstractions borrowed from Burke, shallow systems purloined from De Lolme, adorned with
       Horatian points, or varied with Virgilian passages. It was to be an age of abstruse
       disquisition, that required a compact and sinewy intellect, nurtured in a class of learning
       not yet honoured in Colleges, and which might arrive at conclusions conflicting with
       predominant prejudices.</p>
<p>Adopting this view of the position of Mr. Peel, strengthened as it is by his early
       withdrawal for awhile from the direction of public affairs, it may not only be a charitable,
       but a true estimate of the motives which influenced him in his conduct towards Mr. Canning,
       to conclude that he was not guided in that transaction
       <pb n="173"/> by the disingenuous rivalry usually imputed to him. His statement in Parliament
       of the determining circumstances of his conduct, coupled with his subsequent and almost
       immediate policy, may perhaps always leave this a painful and ambiguous passage in his
       career; but in passing judgment on public men, it behoves us ever to take large and extended
       views of their conduct; and previous incidents will often satisfactorily explain subsequent
       events, which, without their illustrating aid, are involved in misapprehension, or
       mystery.</p>
<p>It would seem, therefore, that Sir Robert Peel from an early period meditated his
       emancipation from the political confederacy in which he was implicated, and that he has been
       continually baffled in this project. He broke loose from Lord Liverpool; he retired from Mr.
       Canning. Forced again into becoming the subordinate leader of the weakest government in
       Parliamentary annals, he believed he had at length achieved his emancipation, when he
       declared to his late colleagues after the overthrow
       <pb n="174"/> of 1830, that he would never again accept a secondary position in office. But
       the Duke of Wellington was too old a tactician to lose so valuable an ally. So his Grace
       declared after the Reform Bill was passed, as its inevitable result, that thenceforth the
       Prime Minister must be a member of the House of Commons, and this aphorism, cited as usual by
       the Duke's parasites as demonstration of his supreme sagacity, was a graceful mode of
       resigning the preeminence which had been productive of such great party disasters. It is
       remarkable that the party who devised and passed the Reform Bill, and who governed the nation
       in consequence for ten years, never once had their Prime Minister in the House of Commons;
       but that does not signify; the Duke's maxim is still quoted as an oracle almost equal in
       prescience to his famous query, How the King's Government was to be carried on? a question to
       which his Grace by this time has contrived to give a tolerably practical answer.</p>
<p>Sir Robert Peel who had escaped from Lord Liverpool, escaped from Mr. Canning, escaped
       <pb n="175"/> even from the Duke of Wellington in 1832; was at length caught in 1834; the
       victim of ceaseless intriguers, who neither comprehended his position, nor that of their
       country.</p>
<pb n="176"/>
</div>