
CHAPTER IV.
In a valley, not far from the margin of a beautiful river, raised on a lofty and
       artificial terrace at the base of a range of wooded heights, was a pile of modern building in
       the finest style of Christian architecture. It was of great extent and richly decorated.
       Built of a white and glittering stone, it sparkled with its pinnacles in the sunshine as it
       rose in strong relief against its verdant back-ground. The winding valley which was studded,
       but not too closely studded, with clumps of old trees, formed for a great extent on either
       side of the mansion a grassy demesne, which was called the Lower Park; but it was a region
       bearing the name of the Upper Park that was
        the peculiar and most picturesque feature of this splendid residence. The
       wooded heights that formed the valley, were not, as they first appeared, a range of hills.
       Their crest was only the abrupt termination of a vast and enclosed table-land, abounding in
       all the qualities of the ancient chase; turf and trees, a wilderness of underwood, and a vast
       spread of gorse and fern. The deer, that abounded, lived here in a world as savage as
       themselves: trooping down in the evening to the river. Some of them indeed were ever in sight
       of those who were in the valley, and you might often observe various groups clustered on the
       green heights above the mansion, the effect of which was most inspiriting and graceful.
       Sometimes in the twilight, a solitary form, magnified by the illusive hour, might be seen
       standing on the brink of the steep, large and black against the clear sky.
We have endeavoured slightly to sketch St. Geneviève as it appeared to our friends at
       Beaumanoir, winding into the valley the day after Mr. Lyle had dined with them. The valley
       opened for about half-a-mile opposite the mansion,
        which gave to the dwellers in it a view over an extensive and richly cultivated
       country. It was through this district that the party from Beaumanoir had pursued their way.
       The first glance at the building, its striking situation, its beautiful form, its brilliant
       colour, its great extent, a gathering as it seemed of galleries, halls, and chapels,
       mullioned windows, portals of clustered columns, and groups of airy pinnacles and fretwork
       spires, called forth a general cry of wonder and praise.
The ride from Beaumanoir had been delightful; the breath of summer in every breeze, the
       light of summer on every tree. The gay laugh of Lady Everingham rang frequently in the air;
       often were her sunny eyes directed to Coningsby, as she called his attention to some fair
       object or some pretty effect. She played the hostess of Nature and introduced him to all the
       beauties.
Mr. Lyle had recognised them. He cantered forward with greetings on a fat little
       fawn-coloured pony, with a long white mane and white flowing tail, and the wickedest eye in
       the world. He rode by the side of the
        Duchess, and indicated their gently-descending route.
They arrived, and the peacocks, who were sunning themselves on the turrets, expanded their
       plumage to welcome them.
"I can remember the old house," said the Duchess as she took Mr. Lyle's arm; "and I am
       happy to see the new one. The Duke had prepared me for much beauty, but the reality exceeds
       his report."
They entered by a short corridor into a large hall. They would have stopped to admire its
       rich roof, its gallery and screen; but their host suggested that they should refresh
       themselves after their ride, and they followed him through several apartments into a spacious
       chamber, its oaken panels covered with a series of most interesting pictures representing the
       siege of Geneviève by the Parliament forces in 1643: the various assaults and sallies, and
       the final discomfiture of the rebels. In all these, figured a brave and graceful Sir Eustace
       Lyle, in cuirass and buff jerkin, with gleaming sword and flowing plume. The sight of these
       pictures was ever a
        source of great excitement to Henry Sydney, who always lamented his ill-luck in
       not living in such days; nay, would insist that all others must equally deplore their evil
       destiny.
"See, Coningsby, this battery on the Upper Park," said Lord Henry. "This did the business:
       how it rakes up the valley! Sir Eustace works it himself. Mother, what a pity that Beaumanoir
       was not besieged!"
"It may be," said Coningsby.
"I always fancy a siege must be so very interesting," said Lady Everingham. "It must be so
       exciting."
"I hope the next siege may be at Beaumanoir, instead of St. Geneviève," said Lyle laughing;
       "as Henry Sydney has such a military predisposition. Duchess, you said the other day that you
       liked Malvoisie, and here is some." "Now broach me a cask of Malvoisie,    Bring pasty of the
       doe;" said the Duchess. "That has been my luncheon"
"A poetic repast," said Lady Theresa.

"Their breeds of sheep must have been very inferior in old days," said Lord Everingham, "as
       they made such a noise about their venison. For my part, I consider it a thing as much gone
       by as tilts and tournaments."
"I am very sorry that they have gone by," said Lady Theresa.
"Everything has gone by that is beautiful," said Lord Henry.
"Life is much easier," said Lord Everingham.
"Life easy!" said Lord Henry. "Life appears to me to be a fierce struggle."
"Manners are easy," said Coningsby, "and life is hard."
"And I wish to see things exactly the reverse," said Lord Henry. "The means and modes of
       subsistence less difficult; the conduct of life more ceremonious."
"Civilization has no time for ceremony," said Lord Everingham.
"How very sententious you all are," said his wife. "I want to see the hall and many other
       things." And they all rose.
There were indeed many other things to see:
        a long gallery rich in ancestral portraits, specimens of art and costume from
       Holbein to Lawrence; courtiers of the Tudors and cavaliers of the Stuarts, terminating in
       red-coated squires fresh from the field and gentlemen buttoned up in black coats, and sitting
       in library chairs with their backs to a crimson curtain. Woman however is always charming;
       and the present generation may view their mothers painted by Lawrence, as if they were
       patronesses of Almacks, or their grandmothers by Reynolds, as Robinettas caressing birds,
       with as much delight as they gaze on the dewy-eyed matrons of Lely and the proud bearing of
       the heroines of Vandyke. But what interested them more than the gallery or the rich saloons,
       or even the baronial hall, was the chapel, in which art had exhausted all its invention, and
       wealth offered all its resources. The walls and vaulted roofs entirely painted in encaustic
       by the first artists of Germany, and representing the principal events of the second
       Testament, the splendour of the mosaic pavement, the richness of the painted windows, the
       sumptuousness of the altar,
        crowned by a master-piece of Carlo Dolce and surrounded by a silver rail, the
       tone of rich and solemn light that pervaded all, and blended all the various sources of
       beauty into one absorbing and harmonious whole; all combined to produce an effect that
       stilled them into a silence that lasted for some minutes, until the ladies breathed their
       feelings in an almost inarticulate murmur of reverence and admiration; while a tear stole to
       the eye of the enthusiastic Henry Sydney.
Leaving the chapel they sauntered through the gardens, until arriving at their limit, they
       were met by the prettiest sight in the world; a group of little pony chairs, each drawn by a
       little fat fawn-coloured pony, like the one that Mr. Lyle had been riding. Lord Henry drove
       his mother; Lord Everingham Lady Theresa; Lady Everingham was attended by Coningsby. Their
       host cantered by the Duchesses side, and along winding roads of very easy ascent, leading
       through the most beautiful woods, and offering the most charming landscapes, they reached in
       due time the Upper Park.
"One sees our host to very great advantage in
        his own house," said Lady Everingham. "He is scarcely the same person. I have
       not observed him once blush. He speaks and moves with ease. It is a pity that he is not more
       graceful. Above all things I like a graceful man."
"That chapel," said Coningsby, "was a fine thing."
"Very," said Lady Everingham. "Did you observe the picture over the altar; the Virgin with
       blue eyes? I never observed blue eyes before in such a picture. What is your favourite colour
       for eyes?"
Coningsby felt embarrassed; he said something rather pointless about admiring everything
       that is beautiful.
"But every one has a favourite style; I want to know yours. Regular features—do you like
       regular features? Or is it expression that pleases you?"
"Expression; I think I like expression. Expression must be always delightful."
"Do you dance?"
"No, I am no great dancer. I fear I have very few accomplishments. I am very fond of
       fencing."

"I don't fence," said Lady Everingham with a smile. "But I think you are right not to
       dance. It is not in your way. You are very ambitious I believe?" she added.
"I was not aware of it; everybody is ambitious."
"You see I know something of your character. Henry has spoken of you to me a great deal;
       long before we met—met again I should say, for we are very old friends, remember. Do you know
       your career very much interests me? I like ambitious men."
There is something very fascinating in the first idea that your career interests a charming
       woman. Coningsby felt that he was perhaps driving a Madame de Longueville. A woman who likes
       ambitious men must be no ordinary character; clearly a sort of heroine. At this moment they
       reached the Upper Park, and the novel landscape changed the current of their remarks.
Far as the eye could reach there spread before them a savage sylvan scene. It wanted
       perhaps undulation of surface, but that deficiency
        was greatly compensated by the multitude and prodigious size of the trees; they
       were the largest indeed that could be well met with in England, and there is no part of
       Europe where the timber is so huge. The broad interminable glades, the vast avenues, the
       quantity of deer browsing or bounding in all directions, the thickets of yellow gorse and
       green fern, and the breeze that even in the stillness of summer was ever playing over this
       table land, all produced an animated and renovating scene. It was like suddenly visiting
       another country, living among other manners, and breathing another air. They stopped for a
       few minutes at a pavilion built for the purposes of the chace, and then returned, all
       gratified by this visit to what appeared to be the higher regions of the earth.
As they approached the brow of the hill, that hung over St. Geneviève, they heard the great
       bell sound.
"What is that?" asked the Duchess.
"It is almsgiving day," replied Mr. Lyle looking a little embarrassed, and for the first
       time blushing. "The people of the parishes
        with which I am connected come to St. Geneviève twice a week at this hour."
"And what is your system?" inquired Lord Everingham, who had stopped, interested by the
       scene. "What check have you?"
"The rectors of the different parishes grant certificates to those who in their belief
       merit bounty according to the rules which I have established. These again are visited by my
       Almoner, who countersigns the certificate, and then they present it at the postern-gate. The
       certificate explains the nature of their necessities, and my steward acts on his
       discretion."
"Mamma, I see them," exclaimed Lady Theresa.
"Perhaps your Grace may think that they might be relieved without all this ceremony," said
       Mr. Lyle, extremely confused. "But I agree with Henry and Mr. Coningsby that Ceremony is not,
       as too commonly supposed, an idle form, I wish the people constantly and visibly to
       comprehend that Property is their protector and their friend."

"My reason is with you, Mr. Lyle," said the Duchess, "as well as my heart."
They came along the valley, a procession of Nature, whose groups an artist might have
       studied. The old man, who loved the pilgrimage too much to avail himself of the privilege of
       a substitute accorded to his grey hairs. He came in person with his grand-child and his
       staff. There also came the widow with her child at the breast, and others clinging to her
       form; some sorrowful faces, and some pale; many a serious one; and now and then a frolic
       glance; many a dame in her red cloak, and many a maiden with her light basket, curly-headed
       urchins with demure looks, and sometimes a stalwart form baffled for a time of the labour
       which he desired. But not a heart there that did not bless the bell that sounded from the
       tower of St. Geneviève!

