
EPILOGUE
Sir Charles Wogan had opportunities enough to appreciate in later years the accuracy of Maria
     Vittoria's prophecy. "Here are two people cross-mated," said she, and events bore her out. The
     jealousies of courtiers no doubt had their share in the estrangement of that unhappy couple,
     but that was no consolation to Wogan, who saw, within so short a time of that journey into
     Italy, James separated from the chosen woman, and the chosen woman herself seeking the
     seclusion of a convent. As his reward he was made Governor of La Mancha in Spain, and no place
     could have been found with associations more suitable to this Irishman who turned his back upon
     his fortunes at Peri. At La Mancha he lived for many years, writing a deal of Latin verse, and
     corresponding with many distinguished men in England upon matters of the intellect. Matters of
     the heart he left alone, and meddled with no more. Nor did any woman ever ride on his black
     horse into his city of dreams. He lived and died a bachelor. The memory of that week when he
     had rescued his Princess and carried her through the snows was to the last too vivid in his
     thoughts. The thunderous roll
      of the carriage down the slopes, the sparks striking from the wheels, the sound
     of Clementina's voice singing softly in the darkness of the carriage, the walk under the stars
     to Ala, the coming of the dawn about that lonely hut, high-placed amongst the pines. These
     recollections bore him company through many a solitary evening. Somehow the world had gone
     awry. Clementina, withdrawn into her convent, was, after all, "wasted," as he had sworn she
     should not be. James was fallen upon a deeper melancholy, and diminished hopes. He himself was
     an exile alone in his white patio in Spain. In only one point was Maria Vittoria's
     prophecy at fault. She had spoken of two who were to find no mates, and one of the two was
     herself. She married five years later.
THE END
