
CHAPTER XXI.

But nature to its inmost part
Faith had refined; and to her heart
   A peaceful cradle given,
Calm as the dew-drops free to rest
Within a breeze-fanned rose's breast
   Till it exhales to Heaven.
Wordsworth. 
It had long been a promise that Mr. Edmonstone should take Charlotte to visit her
      grandmamma, in Ireland. They would have gone last autumn, but for Guy's illness; and now aunt
      Charlotte wrote to hasten the performance of the project. Lady Mabel was very anxious to see
      them, she said; and having grown much more infirm of late, seemed to think it would be the
      last meeting with her son. She talked so much of Mrs. Edmonstone and Laura, that it was plain
      that she wished extremely for a visit from them, though she did not like to ask it, in the
      present state of the family.
A special invitation was sent to Bustle; indeed, Charles said Charlotte could not have gone
      without his permission, for he reigned like a tyrant over her, evidently believing her created
      for no purpose but to wait on him, and take him to walk.
Laura was a great favourite at the cottage at Kilcoran, and felt she ought to offer to go.
      Philip fully agreed, and held out some hopes of following as soon as the session was over, and
      he had been to Redclyffe about some business that had been deferred too long.

And now it appeared that Mr. Edmonstone had a great desire to take his wife, and she herself
      said, that under any other circumstances she should have been very desirous of going. She had
      not been to Ireland for fifteen years, and was sorry to have seen so little of her
      mother-in-law; and now that it had been proved that Charles could exist without her, she would
      not have hesitated to leave him, but for Amabel's state of health and spirits, which made
      going from home out of the question.
Charles and Amabel did not think so. It was not to be endured, that when grandmamma wished
      for her, she should stay at home for them without real necessity; besides, the fatigue,
      anxiety, and sorrow she had undergone of late, had told on her, and had made her alter
      perceptibly, from being remarkably fresh and youthful, to be somewhat aged; and the change to
      a new scene, where she could not be distressing herself at every failure in cheerfulness of
      poor Amy's, was just the thing to do her good.
Amabel was not afraid of the sole charge of Charles or of the baby, for she had been taught
      but too well to manage for herself; she understood Charles very well, and had too much quiet
      good sense to be fanciful about her very healthy baby. Though she was inexperienced, with old
      nurse hard by, and Dr. Mayerne at Broadstone, there was no fear of her not having good counsel
      enough. She was glad to be of some use, by enabling her mother to leave Charles, and her only
      fear was of being dull company for him; but as he was so kind as to bear it, she would do her
      best, and perhaps their neighbours would come and enliven him sometimes.
Charles threw his influence into the same scale. His affectionate observation had shown him
      that it oppressed Amabel's spirits to be the object of such constant solicitude, and he was
      convinced it would be better for her, both to have some necessary occupation and to be free
      from that perpetual mournful watching of her
       mother's, that caused her to make the efforts to be cheerful which did her more
      harm than anything else.
To let her alone to look and speak as she pleased, without the fear of paining and
      disappointing those she loved, keep the house quiet, and give her the employment of household
      cares and attending on himself, was, he thought, the best thing for her; and he was full of
      eagerness and pleasure at the very notion of being of service to her, if only by being good
      for nothing but to be waited on. He thought privately that the spring of his mother's mind had
      been so much injured by the grief she had herself suffered for 'her son Guy,' her cruel
      disappointment in Laura, and the way in which she threw herself into all Amy's affliction,
      that there was a general depression in her way of observing and attending Amy, which did
      further harm; and that to change the current of her thoughts, and bring her home refreshed and
      inspirited, would be the beginning of improvement in all. Or, as he expressed it to Dr.
      Mayerne, 'We shall set off on a new tack.'
His counsel and Mr. Edmonstone's wishes at length decided mamma, on condition that Mary Ross
      and Dr. Mayerne would promise to write on alternate weeks a full report, moral and physical,
      as Charles called it. So in due time the goods were packed, Mrs. Edmonstone cried heartily
      over the baby, advised Amabel endlessly about her, and finally looked back through her tears,
      as she drove away, to see Charles nodding and waving his hand at the bay window, and Amabel
      standing with her parting smile and good-bye on the steps.
The reports, moral and physical, proved that Charles had judged wisely. Amabel was less
      languid as she had more cause for exertion, and seemed relieved by the absence of noise and
      hurry, spending more time down-stairs, and appearing less weary in the evening. She still
      avoided the garden; but she began to like short drives with her brother, in the pony-carriage,
       when he drove on in silence, and let her lean back and gaze up into the sky, or
      into the far distance, undisturbed. Now and then he would be rejoiced by a bright, genuine
      smile, perfectly refreshing, at some of the pretty ways of the babe, a small, but plump and
      lively creature, beginning to grasp with her hands, laugh, and gaze about with eyes that gave
      promise of the peculiar colour and brilliancy of her father's. Amabel was afraid she might be
      tempted into giving Charles too much of the little lady's society; but he was very fond of
      her, regarding her with an odd mixture of curiosity and amusement, much entertained with
      watching what he called her unaccountable manners, and greatly flattered when he could succeed
      in attracting her notice. Indeed, the first time she looked full at him with a smile on the
      verge of a laugh, it completely overcame him, by the indescribably forcible manner in which it
      suddenly recalled the face which had always shone on him like a sunbeam. Above all, it was
      worth anything to see the looks she awoke in her mother, for which he must have loved her,
      even had she not been Guy's child.
In the evening, especially on Sunday, Amabel would sometimes talk to him as she had never
      yet been able to do, about her last summer's journey, and her stay at Recoara, and his way of
      listening and answering had in it something that gave her great pleasure; while, on his side,
      he deemed each fresh word of Guy's a sort of treasure for which to be grateful to her. The
      brother and sister were a great help and happiness to each other; Amabel found herself
      restored to Charles, as Guy had liked to think of her, and Charles felt as if the old childish
      fancies were fulfilled, in which he and Amy were always to keep house together. He was not in
      the least dull; and though his good-natured visitors in the morning were welcome, and received
      with plenty of his gay, lively talk; he did not by any means stand in need of the compassion
      they felt for him, and could have done very well without them;
       while the evenings alone with Amy had in them something so pleasant that they
      were almost better than those when Mr. Ross and Mary came to tea. He wrote word to his mother
      that she might be quite at ease about them; and he thought Amy would get through the
      anniversaries of September better while the house was quiet, so that she need not think of
      trying to hurry home.
He was glad to have done so, for the letters which scarcely missed a day in being written by
      his mother and Charlotte seemed to show that their stay was likely to be long. Lady Mabel was
      more broken than they had expected, and claimed a long visit, as she was sure it would be
      their last, while the Kilcoran party had taken possession of Laura and Charlotte as if they
      never meant to let them go. Charlotte wrote her brother very full and very droll accounts of
      the Iricisms around her, which she enjoyed thoroughly, and Charles, declaring he never
      expected to see little Charlotte come out in the character of the facetious correspondent,
      used to send Mary Ross into fits of laughing by what he read to her. Mr. Fielder, the tutor,
      wrote Charlotte, was very nearly equal to Eveleen's description of him, but very particularly
      agreeable, in fact, the only man who had any conversation, whom she had seen since she had
      been at Kilcoran.
'Imagine,' said Charles, 'the impertinent little puss setting up for intellectual
      conversation, forsooth!'
'That's what comes of living with good company,' said Mary.
The brother and sister used sometimes to drive to Broadstone to fetch their letters by the
      second post.
'Charlotte, of course' said Charles, as he opened one. 'My Lady Morville, what's yours?'
'Only Mr. Markham,' said Amabel, 'about the winding up of our business together, I suppose.
      What does Charlotte say?'
'Charlotte is in a fit of impudence, for which she deserves chastisement,' said Charles,
      unable to help
       laughing, as he read,—'Our last event was a call from the fidus Achates, who it
      seems can no longer wander up and down the Mediterranean without his pius Æneas, and so has
      left the army, and got a diplomatic appointment somewhere in Germany. Lord Kilcoran has asked
      him to come and stay here, and Mabel and I are quite sure he comes for a purpose. Of course he
      has chosen this time, in order that he may be able to have his companion before his eyes, as a
      model for courtship, and I wish I had you to help me look on whenever Philip comes, as that
      laugh I must enjoy alone with Bustle. However, when Philip will come we cannot think, for we
      have heard nothing of him this age, not even Laura, and she is beginning to look very anxious
      about him. Do tell us if you know anything about him. The last letter was when Parliament was
      prorogued, and he was going to Redclyffe, at least three weeks ago.'
'I wonder if Mr. Markham mentions him,' said Amabel, hastily unfolding her letter, which
      was, as she expected, about the executor's business, but glancing on to the end she
      exclaimed,—'Ah! here it is. Listen, Charlie. 'Mr. Morville has been here for the last few
      weeks, and is, I fear, very unwell. He has been entirely confined to the house, almost ever
      since his arrival, by violent headache, which has completely disabled him from attending to
      business; but he will not call in any advice. I make a point of going to see him every day,
      though I believe my presence is anything but acceptable, as in his present state of health and
      spirits I cannot think it right that he should be left to servants.' Poor fellow! Redclyffe
      has been too much for him.'
'Over-worked, I suppose,' said Charles. 'I thought he was coming it pretty strong these last
      few weeks.'
'Not even writing to Laura! How very bad he must be! I will write at once to ask Mr. Markham
      for more particulars.'
She did so, and on the third day they drove again to fetch the answer. It was a much worse
      account. Mr. Morville was, said Markham, suffering dreadfully from
       headache, and lay on the sofa all day, almost unable to speak or move, but
      resolved against having medical advice, though his own treatment of himself did not at all
      succeed in relieving him. There was extreme depression of spirits, and an unwillingness to see
      any one. He had positively refused to admit either Lord Thorndale or Mr. Ashford, and would
      hardly bear to see Markham himself, who, indeed, only forced his presence on him from thinking
      it unfit to leave him entirely to the servants, and would be much relieved if some of Mr.
      Morville's friends were present to free him from the responsibility.
'Hem!' said Charles. 'I can't say it sounds comfortable.'
'It is just as I feared!' said Amy. 'Great excitability of brain and nerve, Dr. Mayerne
      said. All the danger of a brain fever again! Poor Laura! What is to be done?'
Charles was silent.
'It is for want of some one to talk to him,' said Amabel. 'I know how he broods over his sad
      recollections, and Redclyffe must make it so much worse. If mamma and Laura were but at home
      to go to him, it might save him, and it would be fearful for him to have another illness,
      reduced as he is. How I wish he was here!'
'He cannot come, I suppose,' said Charles, 'or he would be in Ireland.'
'Yes. How well Guy knew when he said it would be worse for him than for me! How I wish I
      could do something now to make up for running away from him in Italy. If I was but at
      Redclyffe!'
'Do you really wish it?' said Charles, surprised.
'Yes, if I could do him any good.'
'Would you go there?'
'If I had but papa or mamma to go with me.'
'Do you think I should do as well?'
'Charlie!'

'If you think there would be any use in it, and choose to take the trouble of lugging me
      about the country, I don't see why you should not.'
'Oh! Charlie, how very kind! How thankful poor Laura will be to you! I do believe it will
      save him!' cried Amabel, eagerly.
'But Amy,'—he paused—'shall you like to see Redclyffe?'
'Oh! that is no matter,' said she, quickly. 'I had rather see after Philip than anything. I
      told you how he was made my charge, you know. And Laura! Only will it not be too tiring for
      you?'
'I can't see how it should hurt me. But I forget, what is to be done about your
      daughter?'
'I don't know what harm it could do her,' said Amy, considering. 'Mrs. Gresham brought a
      baby of only three months old from Scotland the other day, and she is six. It surely cannot
      hurt her, but we will ask Dr. Mayerne.'
'Mamma will never forgive us if we don't take the doctor into our councils.'
'Arnaud can manage for us. We would sleep in London, and go on by an early train, and we can
      take our—I mean my—carriage, for the journey after the railroad. It would not be too much for
      you. How soon could we go?'
'The sooner the better,' said Charles. 'If we are to do him any good, it must be speedily,
      or it will be a case of shutting the stable-door. Why not to-morrow?'
The project was thoroughly discussed that evening, but still with the feeling as if it could
      not be real, and when they parted at night they said,—'We will see how the scheme looks in the
      morning.'
Charles was still wondering whether it was a dream, when the first thing he heard in the
      court below his window was,—
'Here, William, here's a note from my lady for you to take to Dr. Mayerne.'

'They be none of them ill?' answered William's voice.
'O no; my lady has been up this hour, and Mr. Charles has rung his bell. Stop, William, my
      lady said you were to call at Harris's and bring home a Bradshaw .'
Reality, indeed, thought Charles, marvelling at his sister, and his elastic spirits throwing
      him into the project with a sort of enjoyment, partaking of the pleasure of being of use, the
      spirit of enterprise, and the 'fun' of starting independently on an expedition unknown to all
      the family.
He met Amabel with a smile that showed both were determined. He undertook to announce the
      plan to his mother, and she said she would write to tell Mr. Markham that as far as could be
      reckoned on two such frail people, they would be at Redclyffe the next evening, and he must
      use his own discretion about giving Mr. Morville the note which she enclosed.
Dr. Mayerne came in time for breakfast, and the letter from Markham was at once given to
      him.
'A baddish state of things, eh, doctor?' said Charles. 'Well, what do you think this lady
      proposes? To set off forthwith, both of us, to take charge of him. What do you think of that,
      Dr. Mayerne?'
'I should say it was the only chance for him,' said the doctor, looking only at the latter.
      'Spirits and health reacting on each other, I see it plain enough. Over-worked in parliament,
      doing nothing in moderation, going down to that gloomy old place, dreaming away by himself,
      going just the right way to work himself into another attack on the brain, and then he is done
      for. I don't know that you could do a wiser thing than go to him, for he is no more fit to
      tell what is good for him than a child.' So spoke the doctor, thinking only of the patient,
      till looking up at the pair he was dismissing to such a charge, the helpless, crippled
      Charles, unable to cross the room without crutches, and Amabel, her delicate face and fragile
      figure in her widow's mourning, looking like a thing to
       be pitied and nursed with the tenderest care, with that young child, too, he
      broke off and said,—'But you don't mean you are in earnest?'
'Never more so in our lives,' said Charles, on which Dr. Mayerne looked so wonderingly and
      inquiringly at Amabel, that she answered,—
'Yes, that we are, if you think it safe for Charles and baby.'
'Is there no one else to go? What's become of his sister?'
'That would never do,' said Charles; 'that is not the question,' and he detailed their
      plan.
'Well, I don't see why it should not succeed,' said the doctor, 'or how you can any of you
      damage yourselves.'
'And baby?' said Amy.
'What should happen to her, do you think?' said the doctor, with his kind, reassuring
      roughness. 'Unless you leave her behind in the carriage, I don't see what harm she could come
      to, and even then, if you direct her properly, she will come safe to hand.'
Amabel smiled, and saying she would fetch her to be inspected, ran up-stairs with the light,
      nimble step of former days.
'There goes one of the smallest editions of the wonders of the world!' said Charles,
      covering a sigh with a smile. 'You don't think it will do her any harm?'
'Not if she wishes it. I have long thought a change, a break, would be the best thing for
      her—poor child! I should have sent her to the seaside, if you had been more moveable, and if I
      had not seen every fuss about her made it worse.'
'That's what I call being a reasonable and valuable doctor,' said Charles. 'If you had
      routed the poor little thing out to the sea, she would have only pined the more. But suppose
      the captain turns out too bad for her management, for old Markham seems in a proper
      taking?'

'Hm! No, I don't expect it is come to that.'
Be that as it may, I have a head, if nothing else, and some one is wanted. I'll write to you
      according as we find Philip.'
The doctor was wanted for another private interview, in which to assure Amabel that there
      was no danger for Charles, and then, after promising to come to Redclyffe if there was
      occasion, and engaging to write and tell Mrs. Edmonstone they had his consent, he departed to
      meet them by-and-by at the station, and put Charles into the carriage.
A very busy morning followed; Amabel arranged household affairs as befitted the vice-queen;
      took care that Charles's comforts were provided for; wrote many a note; herself took down
      Guy's picture, and laid it in her box, before Anne commenced her packing; and lastly, walked
      down to the village to take leave of Alice Lamsden.
Just as the last hues of sunset were fading, on the following evening, Lady Morville and
      Charles Edmonstone were passing from the moor into the wooded valley of Redclyffe. Since
      leaving Moorworth not a word had passed. Charles sat earnestly watching his sister; though
      there was too much crape in the way for him to see her face, and she was perfectly still, so
      that all he could judge by was the close, rigid clasping together of the hands, resting on the
      sleeping infant's white mantle. Each spot recalled to him some description of Guy's, the
      church tower, the school with the two large new windows, the park wall, the rising ground
      within. What was she feeling? He did not dare to address her, till at the lodge-gate, he
      exclaimed— 'There's Markham;' and, at the same time, was conscious of a feeling between hope
      and fear, that this might after all be a fool's errand, and a wonder how they and the master
      of the house would meet if it turned out that they had taken fright without cause.
At his exclamation, Amy leant forward and beckoned,
       Markham came up to the window, and after the greeting on each side, walked along
      with his hand on the door, as the carriage slowly mounted the steep hill, answering her
      questions, 'How is he?'
'No better. He has been putting on leeches, and made himself so giddy, that yesterday he
      could hardly stand.'
'And they have not relieved him?'
'Not in the least. I am glad you are come, for it has been an absurd way of going on.'
'Is he up?'
'Yes; on the sofa in the library.'
'Did you give him my note? Does he expect us?'
'No; I went to see about telling him this morning, but found him so low and silent, I
      thought it was better not. He has not opened a letter this week; and he might have refused to
      see you as he did Lord Thorndale. Besides, I didn't know how he would take my writing about
      him, though if you had not written, I believe I should have let Mrs. Henley know by this
      time.'
'There's an escape for him,' murmured Charles to his sister.
'We have done the best in our power to receive you,' proceeded Markman; 'I hope you will
      find it comfortable, Lady Morville, but—'
'Thank you, I am not afraid,' said Amy, smiling a little.
Markham's eye was on the little white bundle in her lap, but he did not speak of it, and
      went on with explanations about Mrs. Drew and Bolton, and the sitting-room, and tea being
      ready.
Charles saw the great red pile of building rise dark, gloomy and haunted-looking before
      them. The house that should have been Amabel's! Guy's own beloved home! How could she bear it?
      But she was eagerly asking Markham how Philip should be informed of their arrival, and Markham
      was looking perplexed, and saying, that to drive under the gateway, into the paved
       court, would make a thundering sound, that he dreaded for Mr. Morville. Could
      Mr. Charles Edmonstone cross the court on foot? Charles was ready to do so; the carriage
      stopped, Amabel gave the baby to Anne, saw Arnaud help Charles out; and turning to Markham
      said, 'I had better go to him at once. Arnaud will show my brother the way.'
'The sitting-room, Arnaud,' said Markham, and walked on fast with her, while Charles thought
      how strange to see her thus pass the threshold of her husband's house, come thither to relieve
      and comfort his enemy.
She entered the dark-oak hall. On one side the light shone cheerfully from the sitting-room,
      the other doors were all shut. Markham hesitated, and stood reluctant.
'Yes, you had better tell him I am here,' said she, in the voice, so gentle, that no one
      perceived its resolution.
Markham knocked at one of the high heavy doors, and softly opened it. Amabel stood behind
      it, and looked into the room, more than half dark, without a fire, and very large, gloomy, and
      cheerless, in the grey autumn twilight, that just enabled her to see the white pillows on the
      sofa, and Philip's figure stretched out on it. Markham advanced, and stood doubtful for an
      instant, then in extremity, began—'Hem! Lady Morville is come, and—'
Without further delay she came forward, saying— 'How are you, Philip?'
He neither moved nor seemed surprised, he only said, 'So you are come to heap more coals on
      my head.'
A thrill of terror came over her, but she did not show it, as she said, 'I am sorry to find
      you so poorly.'
It seemed as if before he had taken her presence for a dream; for, entirely roused, he
      exclaimed, in a tone of great surprise, 'Is it you, Amy?' then sitting up, 'Why? When did you
      come here?'
'Just now. We were afraid you were ill, we heard a bad account of you, so we have taken you
      by storm:
       Charles, your goddaughter, and I, are come to pay you a visit.'
'Charles! Charles here?' cried Philip, starting up. 'Where is he?'
'Coming in,' said Amy; and Philip, intent only on hospitality, hastened into the hall, and
      met him at the door, gave him his arm, and conducted him where the inviting light guided them
      to the sitting-room. The full brightness of lamp and fire showed the ashy paleness of his
      face; his hair, rumpled with lying on the sofa, had, on the temples, acquired a noticeable
      tint of grey; his whole countenance bore traces of terrible suffering; and Amabel thought that
      even at Recoara, she had never seen him look more wretchedly ill.
'How did you come?' he asked. 'It was very kind. I hope you will be comfortable.'
'We have taken good care of ourselves,' said Amy. 'I wrote to Mr. Markham, for I thought you
      were not well enough to be worried with preparations. We ought to beg your pardon for breaking
      on you so unceremoniously.'
'If any one should be at home here—' said Philip, earnestly;—then interrupting himself, he
      shaded his eyes from the light, 'I don't know how to make you welcome enough. When did you set
      off?'
'Yesterday afternoon,' said Charles; 'we slept in London, and came on to-day.'
'Have you dined?' said Philip, looking perplexed to know where the dinner could come
      from.
'Yes; at K—, thank you.'
'What will you have? I'll ring for Mrs. Drew.'
'No, thank you; don't tease yourself. Mrs. Drew will take care of us. Never mind; but how
      bad your head is!' said Amabel, as he sat down on the sofa, leaning his elbow on his knee, and
      pressing his hand very hard on his forehead. 'You must lie down and keep quiet, and never mind
      us. We only want a little tea. I am just going to take off my bonnet, and see what they have
      done with baby, and then I'll
       come down. Pray lie still till then. Mind he does, Charlie.'
They thought she was gone; but the next moment there she was with the two pillows from the
      library sofa, putting them under Philip's head, and making him comfortable; while he,
      overpowered by a fresh access of headache, had neither will nor power to object. She rang,
      asked for Mrs. Drew, and went.
Philip lay, with closed eyes, as if in severe pain; and Charles, afraid to disturb him, sat
      feeling as if it was a dream. That he, with Amy and her child, should be in Guy's home, so
      differently from their old plans, so very differently from the way she should have arrived. He
      looked round the room, and everywhere knew what Guy's taste had prepared for his bride—piano,
      books, prints, similarities to Hollywell, all with a fresh new bridal effect, inexpressibly
      melancholy. They brought a thought of the bright eye, sweet voice, light step, and merry
      whistle; and as he said to himself 'gone for ever,' he could have hated Philip, but for the
      sight of his haggard features, grey hairs, and the deep lines which, at seven-and-twenty,
      sorrow had traced on his brow.
At length Philip turned and looked up.
'Charles,' he said, 'I trust you have not let her run any risk?'
'No: we got Dr. Mayerne's permission.'
'It is like all the rest,' said Philip, closing his eyes again. Presently he asked: 'How did
      you know I was not well?'
'Markham said something in a business letter that alarmed Amy. She wrote to inquire, and on
      his second letter we thought we had better come and see after you ourselves.'
No more was said till Amabel returned. She had made some stay upstairs, talking to Mrs.
      Drew, who was bewildered between surprise, joy, and grief; looking to see that all was
      comfortable in Charles's room, making arrangements for the child, and at last relieving
      herself by a short space of calm, to feel where she was,
       realise that this was Redclyffe, and whisper to her little girl that it was her
      father's own home. She knew it was the room he had destined for her; she tried, dark as it
      was, to see the view of which he had told her, and looked up, over the mantel-piece, at
      Müller's engraving of St. John. Perhaps that was the hardest time of all her trial, and she
      felt as if, without his child in her arms, she could never have held up under the sense of
      desolation that came over her, left behind, while he was in his true home. Left, she told
      herself, to finish the task he had begun, and to become fit to follow him. Was she not in the
      midst of fulfilling his last charge, that Philip should be taken care of? It was no time for
      giving way, and here was his own little messenger of comfort looking up with her sleepy eyes
      to tell her so. Down she must go, and put off 'thinking herself into happiness,' till the
      peaceful time of rest; and presently she softly re-entered the sitting-room, bringing to both
      its inmates in her very presence such solace as she little guessed, in her straightforward
      desire to nurse Philip, and take care Charles was not made uncomfortable.
That stately house had probably never, since its foundation, seen anything so home-like as
      Amabel making tea and waiting on her two companions; both she and Charles pleasing each other
      by enjoying the meal, and Philip giving his cup to be filled again and again, and wondering
      why one person's tea should taste so unlike another's.
He was not equal to conversation, and Charles and Amabel were both tired, so that tea was
      scarcely over before they parted for the night; and Amy, frightened at the height and
      slipperiness of the dark oak stairs, could not be at peace till she had seen Arnaud help
      Charles safely up them, and made him promise not to come down without assistance in the
      morning.
She was in the sitting-room soon after nine next morning, and found breakfast on one table,
      and Charles writing a letter on the other.

'Well,' said he, as she kissed him; 'all right with you and little miss?'
'Quite, thank you. And are you rested?'
'Slept like a top, and what did you do: Did you sleep like a sensible woman?'
'Pretty well, and baby was very good. Have you heard anything of Philip?'
'Bolton thinks him rather better, and says he is getting up.'
'How long have you been up?'
'A long time. I told Arnaud to catch Markham when he came up, as he always does in the
      morning, to see after Philip, and I have had a conference with him and Bolton, so that I can
      lay the case before Dr. Mayerne scientifically.'
'What do you think of it?'
'I think we came at the right time. He has been getting more and more into work in London,
      taking no exercise, and so was pretty well knocked up when he came here; and this place
      finished it. He tried to attend to business about the property, but it always ended in his
      head growing so bad, he had to leave all to Markham, who, by the way, has been thoroughly
      propitiated by his anxiety for him. Then he gave up entirely; has not been out of doors,
      written a note, nor seen a creature the last fortnight, but there he has lain by himself in
      the library, given up to all manner of dismal thoughts without a break.'
'How dreadful!' said Amabel, with tears in her eyes. 'Then he would not see Mr. Ashford?
      Surely, he could have done something for him.'
'I'll tell you what,' said Charles, lowering his voice, 'from what Bolton says, I think he
      had a dread of worse than brain fever.'
She shuddered, and was paler, but did not speak.
'I believe,' continued Charles, 'that it is one half nervous and the oppression of this
      place, and the other half, the over straining of a head that was already in a ticklish
      condition. I don't think there
       was any real danger of more than such a fever as he had at Corfu, which would
      probably have been the death of him; but I think he dreaded still worse, and that his horror
      of seeing any one, or writing to Laura, arose from not knowing how far he could control his
      words.'
'O! I am glad we came,' repeated Amable, pressing her hands together.
'He has been doctoring himself,' proceeded Charles; 'and probably has kept off the fever by
      strong measures, but of course, the more he reduced his strength, the greater advantage he
      gave to what was simply low spirits. He must have had a terrible time of it, and where it
      would have ended I cannot guess; but it seems to me that most likely, now that he is once
      roused, he will come right again.'
Just as Charles had finished speaking, he came down, looking extremely ill, weak, and
      suffering; but calmed, and resting on that entire dependence on Amabel, which had sprung up at
      Recoara.
She would not let him go back to his gloomy library, but made him lie on the sofa in the
      sitting-room, and sat there herself, as she thought a little quiet conversation between her
      and Charles, would be the best thing for him. She wrote to Laura, and he sent a message, for
      he could not yet attempt to write, and Charles wrote reports to his mother and Dr. Mayerne; a
      little talk now and then going on about family matters.
Amabel asked Philip if he knew that Mr. Thorndale was at Kilcoran.
'Yes,' he said, 'he believed there was a letter from him, but his eyes had ached too much of
      late to read.'
Mrs. Ashford sent in to ask whether Lady Morville would like to see her. Amabel's face
      flushed, and she proposed going to her in the library; but Philip, disliking Amy's absence
      more than the sight of a visitor, begged she might come to the sitting-room.

The Ashfords had been surprised beyond measure at the tidings that Lady Morville had
      actually come to Redclyffe, and had been very slow to believe it; but when convinced by
      Markham's own testimony, Mrs. Ashford's first idea had been to go and see if she could be any
      help to the poor young thing in that great desolate house, whither Mrs. Ashford had not been,
      since, just a year ago, Markham had conducted her to admire his preparations. There was much
      anxiety too, about Mr. Morville, of whose condition Markham had been making a great mystery,
      and on her return, Mr. Ashford was very eager for her report.
Mr. Morville, she said, did look and seem very far from well, but Lady Morville had told her
      they hoped it was chiefly from over fatigue, and that rest would soon restore him. Lady
      Morville herself was a fragile, delicate creature, very sweet looking, but so gentle and
      shrinking, apparently, that it gave the impression of her having no character at all, not what
      Mrs. Ashford would have expected Sir Guy to choose. She had spoken very little, and the chief
      of the conversation had been sustained by her brother.
'I was very much taken with that young Mr. Edmonstone,' said Mrs. Ashford; 'he is about
      three and twenty, sadly crippled, but with such a pleasing, animated face, and so extremely
      agreeable and sensible. I do not wonder at Sir Guy's enthusiastic way of talking of him. I
      could almost fancy it was admiration of the brother transferred to the sister.'
'Then after all, you are disappointed in her, and don't lament, like Markham, that she is
      not mistress here?'
'No: I wont say I am disappointed; she is a very sweet creature. O yes, very! but far too
      soft and helpless for such a charge as this property, unless she had her father or brother to
      help her. But I must tell you that she took me to see her baby, a nice little lively thing,
      poor little dear! and, when we were alone, she
       spoke rather more, begged me to send her godson to see her, thanked me for
      coming, but crying stopped her from saying more. I could grow very fond of her. No, I don't
      wonder at him, for there is a great charm in anything so soft and dependent.'
Decidedly, Mary Ross had been right when she said, that except Sir Guy, there was no one so
      difficult to know as Amy.
In the afternoon, Charles insisted on Amabel's going out for fresh air and exercise, and she
      liked the idea of a solitary wandering; but Philip, to her surprise, offered to come with her,
      and she was too glad to see him exert himself, to regret the musings she had hoped for, so out
      they went, after opening the window, to give Charles what he called an airing, and he said,
      that in addition he should 'hirple about a little to explore the ground-floor of the
      house.'
'We must contrive some way for him to drive out,' said Philip, as he crossed the court with
      Amabel; 'and you too. There is no walk here, but up hill or down.'
Up hill they went, along the path leading up the green slope, from which the salt wind blew
      refreshingly. In a few minutes, Amabel found herself on a spot which thrilled her all
      over.
There lay before her, Guy's own Redclyffe bay; the waves lifting their crests and breaking,
      the surge resounding, the sea-birds skimming round, the Shagrock dark and rugged, the scene
      which seemed above all the centre of his home affections, which he had so longed to show her,
      that it had cost him an effort on his deathbed to resign the hope; the leaping waves that he
      said he would not change for the white-headed mountains. And now he was lying among those
      southern mountains, and she stood in the spot where he had loved to think of seeing her; and
      with Philip by her side. His sea, his own dear sea, the vision of which had cheered his last
      day, like the face of a dear old friend; his sea, rippling and glancing on, unknowing that the
      eyes that
       had loved it so well would gaze on it no more; the wind that he had longed for
      to cool his fevered brow, the rock which had been like a playmate in his boyhood, and where he
      had perilled his life, and rescued so many. It was one of the seasons when a whole gush of
      fresh perceptions of his feelings, like a new meeting with himself, would come on her, her
      best of joys; and there she stood, gazing fixedly, her black veil fluttering in the wind, and
      her hands pressed close together, till Philip, little knowing what the sight was to her,
      shivered, saying it was very cold and windy, and without hesitation she turned away, feeling
      that now Redclyffe was precious indeed.
She brought her mind back to listen, while Philip was considering of means of taking Charles
      out of doors; he supposed there might be some vehicle about the place; but he thought there
      was no horse. Very unlike was this to the exact Philip. The great range of stables was before
      them, where the Morvilles had been wont to lodge their horses as sumptuously as themselves,
      and Amabel propsed to go and see what they could find; but nothing was there but emptiness,
      till they came to a pony in one stall, a goat in another, and one wheelbarrow in the
      coach-house.
On leaving it, under the long-sheltered sunny wall, they came in sight of a meeting between
      the baby taking the air in Anne's arms, and Markham, who had been hovering about all day,
      anxious to know how matters were going on. His back was towards them, so that he was
      unconscious of their approach, and they saw how he spoke to Anne, looked fixedly at the child,
      made her laugh, and, finally, took her in his arms, as he had so often carried her father,
      studying earnestly her little face. As soon as he saw them coming, he hastily gave her back to
      Anne, as if ashamed to be thus caught, but he was obliged to grunt and put his hand up to his
      shaggy eyelashes, before he could answer Amabel's greeting.
He could hardly believe his eyes, that here was Mr.
       Morville, who yesterday was scarcely able to raise his head from the pillow, and
      could attend to nothing. He could not think what Lady Morville had done to him, when he heard
      him inquiring and making arrangements about sending for a pony carriage, appearing thoroughly
      roused, and the dread of being seen or spoken to entirely passed away. Markham was greatly
      rejoiced, for Mr. Morville's illness, helplessness and dependence upon himself, had softened
      him and won him to regard him kindly as nothing else would have done; and his heart was
      entirely gained, when, after they had wished him good bye, he saw Philip and Amabel walk on,
      overtake Anne, Amy take the baby and hold her up to Philip, who looked at her with the same
      earnest interest. From thenceforward Markham knew that Redclyffe was nothing but a burden to
      Mr. Morville, and he could bear to see it in his possession, since, like himself, he seemed to
      regard Sir Guy's daughter like a disinherited princess.
This short walk fatigued Philip thoroughly. He slept till dinner-time, and when he awoke
      said it was the first refreshing dreamless sleep he had had for weeks. His head was much
      better, and at dinner he had something like an appetite.
It was altogether a day of refreshment, and so were the ensuing ones. Each day Philip became
      stronger, and resumed more of his usual habits. From writing a few lines in Amabel's daily
      letter to Laura, he proceeded to filling the envelope, and from being put to sleep by
      Charles's reading, to reading aloud the whole evening himself. The pony carriage was set up,
      and he drove Charles out every day, Amabel being then released from attending him, and free to
      enjoy herself in her own way in rambles about the house and park, and discoveries of the old
      haunts she knew so well by description.
She early found her way to Guy's own room, where she would walk up and down with her child
      in her arms, talking to her, and holding up to her to be admired,
       the treasures of his boyhood, that Mrs. Drew delighted to keep in order. One
      day, when alone in the sitting-room, she thought of trying the piano he had chosen for her. It
      was locked, but the key was on her own split-ring, where he had put it for her the day he
      returned from London. She opened it, and it so happened, that the first note she struck
      reminded her of one of the peculiarly sweet and deep tones of Guy's voice. It was like awaking
      its echo again, and as it died away, she hid her face and wept. But from that time the first
      thing she did when her brother and cousin were out, was always to bring down her little girl,
      and play to her, watching how she enjoyed the music.
Little Mary prospered in the sea air, gained colour, took to springing and laughing; and her
      intelligent lively way of looking about brought out continually more likeness to her father.
      Amabel herself was no longer drooping and pining; her step grew light and elastic; a shade of
      pink returned to her cheek, and the length of walk she could take was wonderful, considering
      her weakness in the summer. Every day she stood on the cliff and looked at 'Guy's sea,' before
      setting out to visit the cottages, and hear the fond rough recollections of Sir Guy, or to
      wander far away into the woods or on the moor, and find the way to the places he had loved.
      One day when Philip and Charles came in from a drive, they overtook her in the court, her
      cloak over her arm, her crape limp with spray, her cheeks brightened to a rosy glow by the
      wind, and a real smile as she looked up to them. When Charles was on his sofa she stooped over
      him and whispered, 'James and Ben Robinson have taken me out to the Shag!'
She saw Mr. Wellwood, and heard a good account of Coombe Prior. She made great friends with
      the Ashfords, especially little Lucy and the baby. She delighted in visits to the cottages,
      and Charles every day wondered where was the drooping dejection that
       she could not shake off at home. She would have said that in Guy's own home,
      'the joy' had come to her, no longer in fitful gleams and held by an effort for a moment, but
      steadily brightening. She missed him indeed, but the power of finding rest in looking forward
      to meeting him, the pleasure of dwelling on the days he had been with her, and the
      satisfaction of doing his work for the present, had made a happiness for her, and still in
      him, quiet, grave, and subdued, but happiness likely to bloom more and more brightly
      throughout her life. The anniversary of his death was indeed a day of tears, but the tears
      were blessed ones, and she was more full of the feeling that had sustained her on that
      morning, than she had been through all the year before.
Charles and Philip meanwhile proceeded excellently together, each very anxious for the
      comfort of the other. Philip was a good deal overwhelmed at first by the quantity of business
      on his hands, and setting about it while his head was still weak would have seriously hurt
      himself again, if Charles had not come to his help, worked with a thorough good will, great
      clearness and acuteness, and surprised Philip by his cleverness and perseverance. He was
      elated at being of so much use; and begged to be considered for the future as Philip's private
      secretary, to which the only objection was, that his handwriting was as bad as Philip's was
      good; but it was an arrangement so much to the benefit of both parties that it was gladly
      made. Philip was very grateful for such valuable assistance; and Charles amused himself with
      triumphing in his importance when he should sit in state on his sofa at Hollywell, surrounded
      with blue-books, getting up the statistics for some magnificent speech of the honourable
      member for Moorworth.
In the meantime, Charles and Amabel saw no immediate prospect of their party returning from
      Ireland, and thought it best to remain at Redclyffe, since Philip had so much to do there; and
      besides, events
       were occurring at Kilcoran which would have prevented his visit, even without
      his illness.
One of the first drives that Charles and Philip took after the latter was equal to any
      exertion, was to Thorndale. There Charles was much amused by the manner in which Philip was
      received, and he himself, for his sake; and, as he said to Amabel on his return, there was no
      question now, that the blame of spoiling Philip did not solely rest at Hollywell.
Finding only Lady Thorndale at home, and hearing that Lord Thorndale was in the grounds,
      Philip went out to look for him, leaving Charles on the sofa, under her ladyship's care.
      Charles, with a little exaggeration, professed that he had never been so flattered in his
      whole life, as he was by the compliments that reflected on him, as the future brother-in-law
      of Philip; and that he had really begun to think even Laura not half sensible enough of her
      own happiness. Lady Thorndale afterwards proceeded to inquiries about the De Courcy family,
      especially Lady Eveleen; and Charles, enlightened by Charlotte, took delight in giving a
      brilliant description of his cousin's charms, for which he was rewarded by very plain
      intimations of the purpose for which her son James was gone to Kilcoran.
On talking the visit over as they drove home, Charles asked Philip if he had guessed at his
      friend's intentions. 'Yes,' he answered.
'Then you never took the credit of it. Why did you not tell us?'
'I knew it from himself, in confidence.'
'Oh!' said Charles, amusing himself with the notion of the young man's dutifully asking the
      permission of his companion, unshaken in allegiance though the staff might be broken, and the
      book drowned deeper than did ever plummet sound. Philip spoke no more, and Charles would ask
      no more, for Philip's own affairs of the kind were not such as to encourage talking of other
      people's. No explanation was needed why he should now promote an attachment, which he had
      strongly
       disapproved while James Thorndale was still in the army.
A day or two after, however, came a letter from Charlotte, bringing further news, at which
      Charles was so amazed, that he could not help communicating it at once to his companions.
'So! Eveleen wont have him!'
'What?' exclaimed both.
'You don't mean that she has refused Thorndale!' said Philip.
'Even so!' said Charles. 'Charlotte says he is gone. 'Poor Mr. Thorndale left us this
      morning, after a day of private conferences, in which he seems to have had no satisfaction,
      for his resolute dignity and determination to be agreeable all the evening were'—ahem— 'were
      great. Mabel cannot get at any of the real reasons from Eveleen, though I think I could help
      her, but I can't tell you.''
'Charlotte means mischief,' said Charles, as he concluded.
'I am very sorry!' said Philip. 'I did think Lady Eveleen would have been able to estimate
      Thorndale. It will be a great disappointment—the inclination has been of long standing. Poor
      Thorndale!'
'It would have been a very good thing for Eva,' said Amabel. 'Mr. Thorndale is such a
      sensible man.'
'And I thought his steady sense just what was wanting to bring out all her good qualities
      that are running to waste in that irregular home,' said Philip. 'What can have possessed
      her?'
'Ay! something must have possessed her,' said Charles. 'Eva was always ready to be fallen in
      love with on the shortest notice, and if there was not something prior in her imagination,
      Thorndale would not have had much difficulty. By-the-by, depend upon it, 'tis the tutor.'
Philip looked a little startled, but instantly reassuring himself, said,—

'George Fielder? Impossible! You have never seen him!'
'Ah! don't you remember her description?' said Amy, in a low voice, rather sadly.
'The very reason, Amy;' said Charles; 'it showed that he had attracted her fancy.'
Philip smiled a little incredulously.
'Ay!' said Charles, 'you may smile, but you handsome men can little appreciate the
      attractiveness of an interesting ugliness. It is the way to be looked at in the end. Mark my
      words, it is the tutor.'
'I hope not!' said Philip, as if shaken in his confidence. 'Any way it is a bad affair. I am
      very much concerned for Thorndale.'
So sincerely concerned, that his head began to ache in the midst of some writing. He was
      obliged to leave it to Charles to finish, and go out to walk with Amy.
Amabel came in before him, and began to talk to Charles about his great vexation at his
      friend's disappointment.
'I am almost sorry you threw out that hint about Mr. Fielder,' said she. 'Don't you remember
      how he was recommended?'
'Ah! I had forgotten it was Philip's doing, a bit of his spirit of opposition,' said
      Charles. 'Were not the boys to have gone to Coombe Prior?'
'Yes,' said Amabel, 'that is the thing that seems to have made him so unhappy about it. I am
      sure I hope it is not true,' she added, considering, 'for, Charlie, you must know that Guy had
      an impression against him.'
'Had he?' said Charles, anxiously.
'It was only an impression, nothing he could accuse him of, or mention to Lord Kilcoran. He
      would have told no one but me, but he had seen something of him at Oxford, and thought him
      full of conversation, very clever, only not the sort of talk he liked.'
'I don't like that. Charlotte concurs in testifying to his agreeableness; and in the dearth
      of intellect, I should not wonder at Eva's taking up with
       him. He would be a straw to the drowning. It looks dangerous!'
They were very anxious for further intelligence, but received none, except that Philip had a
      letter from his friend, on which his only comment was a deep sigh, and 'Poor Thorndale! She
      little knows what she has thrown away!' Letters from Kilcoran became rare; Laura scarcely
      wrote at all to Philip, and though Mrs. Edmonstone wrote as usual, she did not notice the
      subject; while Charlotte's gravity and constraint, when she did achieve a letter to Charles,
      were in such contrast to her usual free and would-be satirical style, that such eyes as her
      brother's could hardly fail to see that something was on her mind.
So it went on week after week, Charles and Amabel wondering when they should ever have any
      notice to go home, and what their family could be doing in Ireland. October had given place to
      November, and more than a week of November had passed, and here they still were, without
      anything like real tidings.
At last came a letter from Mrs. Edmonstone which Amabel could not read without one little
      cry of surprise and dismay, and then had some difficulty in announcing its contents to
      Philip.
Kilcoran, Nov. 6th.
My dearest Amy ,—You will be extremely surprised at what I have to tell you, and no
      less grieved. It has been a most unpleasant, disgraceful business from beginning to end, and
      the only comfort in it to us is the great discretion and firmness that Charlotte has shown. I
      had better, however, begin at the beginning, and tell you the history as far as I understand
      it myself. You know that Mr. James Thorndale has been here, and perhaps you know it was for
      the purpose of making an offer to Eveleen. Every one was much surprised at her refusing him,
      and still more when, after much prevarication, it came out that the true motive was her
      attachment to Mr. Fielder, the tutor. It appeared
       that they had been secretly engaged for some weeks, ever since they had
      perceived Mr. Thorndale's intentions, and not, as it was in poor Laura's case, an unavowed
      attachment, but an absolute engagement. And fancy Eva justifying it by Laura's example! There
      was of course great anger and confusion. Lord Kilcoran was furious, poor Lady Kilcoran had
      nervous attacks, the gentleman was dismissed from the house, and supposed to be gone to
      England, Eva shed abundance of tears, but after a great deal of vehemence she appeared subdued
      and submissive. We were all very sorry for her, as there is much that is very agreeable and
      likely to attract her in Mr. Fielder, and she always had too much mind to be wasted in such a
      life as she leads here. It seemed as if Laura was a comfort to her, and Lady Kilcoran was very
      anxious we should stay as long as possible. This was all about three weeks or a month ago; Eva
      was recovering her spirits, and I was just beginning a letter to tell you we hoped to be at
      home in another week, when Charlotte came into my room in great distress to tell me that
      Eveleen and Mr. Fielder were on the verge of a run-away marriage. Charlotte had been coming
      back alone from a visit to grandmamma, and going down a path out of the direct way to recall
      Bustle, who had run off, she said, as if he scented mischief, came, to her great astonishment,
      on Eveleen walking arm-in-arm with Mr. Fielder! Charlie will fancy how Charlotte looked at
      them! They shuffled, and tried to explain it away, but Charlotte was too acute for them, or
      rather, she held steadily to 'be that as it may, Lord Kilcoran ought to know it.' They tried
      to frighten her with the horrors of betraying secrets, but she said none had been confided to
      her, and mamma would judge. They tried to persuade her it was the way of all lovers, and
      appealed to Laura's example, but there little Charlotte was less to be shaken than on any
      point. 'I did not think them worthy to hear their names,' she said to me, 'but I told
      them, that I had seen that the truest and deepest of love had a horror of all that was like
      wrong,' and as to
       Philip and Laura, they little knew what they had suffered; besides, theirs was
      not half so bad.' I verily believe these were the very words she used to them. At last Eva
      threw herself on her mercy, and begged so vehemently that she would only wait another day,
      that she suspected, and with sharpness very like Charlie's, forced from Eva that they were to
      marry the next morning. Then she said it would be a great deal better that they should abuse
      her and call her a spy than do what they would repent of all their lives; she begged Eva's
      pardon, and cried so much that Eva was in hopes she would relent, and then came straight to
      me, very unhappy, and not in the least triumphant in her discovery. You can guess what a
      dreadful afternoon we had, I don't think any one was more miserable than poor Charlotte, who
      stayed shut up in my room all day, dreading the sight of any one, and expecting to be
      universally called a traitor. The end was, that after much storming, Lord Kilcoran, finding
      Eveleen determined, and anxious to save her the discredit of an elopement, has agreed to
      receive Mr. Fielder, and they are to be married from this house on the 6th of December, though
      what they are to live upon no one can guess. The Kilcorans are very anxious to put the best
      face on the matter possible, and have persuaded us, for the sake of the family, to stay for
      the wedding; indeed, poor Lady Kilcoran is so completely overcome, that I hardly like to leave
      her till this is over. How unpleasant the state of things in the house is no one can imagine,
      and very, very glad shall I be to get back to Hollywell and my Amy and Charlie. Dearest
      Amy,
'Your most affectionate,
'L. Edmonstone .'
The news was at length told, and Philip was indeed thunderstruck at this fresh consequence
      of his interference. It threatened at first to overthrow his scarcely recovered spirits, and
      but for the presence of his guests, it seemed as if it might have brought on a renewal of the
      state from which they had restored him.

'Yes,' said Charles to Amy, when they talked it over alone. 'It seems as if good people
      could do wrong with less impunity than others. It is rather like the saying about fools and
      angels. Light-minded people see the sin, but not the repentance, so they imitate the one
      without being capable of the other. Here are Philip and Laura finishing off like the end of a
      novel, fortune and all, and setting a very bad example to the world in general.'
'As the world cannot see below the surface,' said Amy; 'how distressed Laura must be! You
      see, mamma does not say one word about her.'
Philip had not much peace till he had written to Mr. Thorndale, who was going at once to
      Germany, not liking to return home to meet the condolences. Mrs. Edmonstone had nearly the
      whole correspondence of the family on her hands; for neither of her daughters liked to write,
      and she gave the description of the various uncomfortable scenes that took place, Lord De
      Courcy's stern and enduring displeasure, and his father's fast subsiding violence; Lady
      Kilcoran's distress, and the younger girls' excitement and amusement; but she said she thought
      the very proper and serious way in which Charlotte viewed it, would keep it from doing them
      much harm, provided, as was much to be feared, Lord Kilcoran did not end by keeping the pair
      always at home, living upon him till Mr. Fielder could get a situation. In fact, it was
      difficult to know what other means there were of providing for them.
At last the wedding took place, and Mrs. Edmonstone wrote a letter, divided between
      indignation at the foolish display that had attended it, and satisfaction at being able at
      length to fix the day for the meeting at Hollywell. No one could guess how she longed to be at
      home again, and to be once more with Charlie.
Nor were Charles and Amabel less ready to go home, though they could both truly say that
      they had much enjoyed their stay at Redclyffe. Philip was to come with them, and it was
      privately agreed that he should
       return to Redclyffe no more till he could bring Laura with him. Amabel had
      talked of her sister to Mrs. Ashford, and done much to smooth the way; and even on the last
      day or two, held a few consultations with Philip, as to the arrangements that Laura would
      like. One thing, however, she must ask for her own pleasure. 'Philip,' said she, 'you must let
      me have this piano.'
His answer was by look and gesture.
'And I want very much to ask a question, Philip. Will you tell me which is Sir Hugh's
      picture?'
'You have been sitting opposite to it every day at dinner.'
'That?' exclaimed Amy. 'From what I heard, I fully expected to have known Sir Hugh's in a
      moment; and I often looked at that one, but I never could see more likeness than there is in
      almost all the pictures about the house.'
She went at once to study it again, and wondered more.
'I have seen him sometimes look like it; but it is not at all the strong likeness I
      expected.'
Philip stood silently gazing, and certainly the countenance he recalled, pleading with him
      to desist from his wilfulness, and bending over him in his sickness, was far unlike in
      expression to the fiery youth before him. In a few moments more, Amabel had run upstairs, and
      brought down Mr. Shene's portrait. There was proved to be more resemblance than either of them
      had at first sight credited. The form of the forehead, nose, and short upper lip were
      identical, so were the sharply defined black eye-brows, the colour of the eyes; and the way of
      standing in both had a curious similarity; but the expression was so entirely different, that
      strict comparison alone proved that Guy's animated, contemplative, and most winning
      countenance, was in its original lineaments entirely the same with that of his ancestor.
      Although Sir Hugh's was then far from unprepossessing, and bore as yet no trace of his unholy
      passions, it brought to Amabel's mind the shudder
       with which Guy had mentioned his likeness to that picture, and seemed to show
      her the nature he had tamed.
Philip, meanwhile, after one glance at Mr. Shene's portrait, which he had not before seen,
      had turned away, and stood leaning against the window-frame. When Amy had finished her silent
      comparison, and was going to take her treasure back, he looked up, and said, 'Do you dislike
      leaving that with me for a few minutes?'
'Keep it as long as you like,' said she, going at once, and she saw him no more till nearly
      an hour after; when, as she was coming out of her own room, he met her, and gave it into her
      hands, saying nothing except a smothered 'Thank you;' but his eyelids were so swollen and
      heavy, that Charles feared his head was bad again, while Amy was glad to perceive that he had
      had the comfort of tears.
Every one was sorry to wish Lady Morville and her brother good bye, only consoling
      themselves with hoping that their sister might be like them; and as to little Mary, the
      attention paid to her was so devoted and universal, that her mamma thought it very well she
      should receive the first ardour of it while she was too young to have her head turned.
They again slept a night in London, and in the morning Philip took Charles for a drive
      through the places he had heard of, and was much edified by actually beholding. They were
      safely at home the same evening, and on the following, the Hollywell party was once more
      complete, gathered round Charles's sofa in a confusion of welcomes and greetings.
Mrs. Edmonstone could hardly believe her eyes, so much had Charles's countenance lost its
      invalid look, and his movements were so much more active; Amabel, too, though still white and
      thin, had a life in her eye and an air of health most unlike her languor and depression.
Everyone looked well and happy but Laura, and she
       had a worn, faded, harassed aspect, which was not cheered even by Philip's
      presence; indeed, she seemed almost to shrink from speaking to him. She was the only silent
      one of the party that evening, as they gathered round the dinner or tea-table, or sat divided
      into threes or pairs, talking over the subjects that would not do to be discussed in public.
      Charlotte generally niched into Amy's old corner by Charles, hearing about Redclyffe, or
      telling about Ireland; Mrs. Edmonstone and Amy on the opposite sides of the ottoman, their
      heads meeting over the central cushion, talking in low, fond, inaudible tones; Mr. Edmonstone
      going in and out of the room, and joining himself to one or other group, telling and hearing
      news, and sometimes breaking up the pairs; and then Mrs. Edmonstone came to congratulate
      Charles on Amy's improved looks, or Charlotte pressed up close to Amy to tell her about
      grandmamma. For Charlotte could not talk about Eveleen, she had been so uncomfortable at the
      part she had had to act, that all the commendation she received was only like pain and shame,
      and her mother was by no means dissatisfied that it should be so, since a degree of
      forwardness had been her chief cause of anxiety in Charlotte; and it now appeared that without
      losing her high spirit and uncompromising sense of right, her sixteenth year was bringing with
      it feminine reserve.
Laura lingered late in Amabel's room, and when her mother had wished them good night, and
      left them together, she exclaimed, 'Oh, Amy! I am so glad to be come back to you. I have been
      so very miserable!'
'But you see he is quite well,' said Amy. 'We think him looking better than in the
      summer.'
'O yes! Oh, Amy, what have you not done? If you could guess the relief of hearing you were
      with him, after that suspense!' But as if losing that subject in one she was still more eager
      about, what did he think of me?'
'My dear,' said Amabel, 'I don't think I am the right person to tell you that.'

'You saw how it struck him when he heard of my share in it.'
'Yours? Mamma never mentioned you.'
'Always kind!' said Laura. 'Oh, Amy! what will you think of me when I tell I knew poor Eva's
      secret all the time! What could I do, when Eva pleaded my own case! It was very different, but
      she would not see it, and I felt as if I was guilty of all. Oh how I envied Charlotte.'
'Dear Laura, no wonder you were unhappy!'
'Nothing hitherto has been equal to it!' said Laura. 'There was the misery of his silence,
      and the anxiety that you, dearest, freed me from; then no sooner was that over than this was
      confided to me. Think what I felt when Eva put me in mind of a time when I argued in favour of
      some such concealment in a novel! No, you can never guess what I went through, knowing that
      he would think me weak, blameable, unworthy!'
'Nay, he blames himself too much to blame you.'
'No, that he must not do! It was my fault from the beginning. If I had but gone at once to
      mamma!
'Oh, I am so glad!' exclaimed Amy, suddenly.
'Glad?'
'I mean,' said Amy, looking down, 'now you have said that, I am sure you will be
      happier.'
'Happier, now I feel and see how I have lowered myself even in his sight?' said Laura,
      drooping her head and hiding her face in her hands, as she went on in so low a tone that Amy
      could hardly hear her. 'I know it all now. He loves me still, as he must whatever he has once
      taken into that deep, deep, heart of his; he will always; but he cannot have that honouring,
      trusting, confiding love that—you enjoyed and deserved, Amy—that he would have had if I had
      cared first for what became me. If I had only at first told mamma, he would not even have been
      blamed; he would have been spared half this suffering and self-reproach; he would have loved
      me more; Eva might not have been led astray; at least, she could not have laid it to
       my charge,—and I could lift up my head,' she finished, as she hung it almost to
      her knees.
Her sister raised the head, laid it on her own bosom, and kissed the cheeks and brow again
      and again. 'Dearest, dearest Laura, I am so sorry for you; but I am sure you must feel freer
      and happier now you know it all, and see the truth.'
'I don't know!' said Laura, sadly.
'And at least you will be better able to comfort him.'
'No, no, I shall only add to his self-reproach. He will see more plainly what a wretched
      weak creature he fancied had firmness and discretion. Oh, what a broken reed I have been to
      him!'
'There is strength and comfort for us all to lean upon,' said Amy. 'But you ought to go to
      bed. Shall I read to you, Laura? you are so tired, I should like to come and read you to
      sleep.'
Laura was not given to concealments; that fatal one had been her only insincerity, and she
      never thought of doing otherwise than telling the whole of her conduct in Ireland to Philip.
      She sat alone with him the next morning, explained all, and entreated his pardon, humiliating
      herself so much, that he could not bear to hear her.'
'It was the fault of our whole lifetime, Laura,' said he, recovering himself, when a few
      agitated words had passed on either side. 'I taught you to take my dictum for law, and abused
      your trust, and perverted all the best and most precious qualities. It is I who stand first to
      bear the blame, and would that I could bear all the suffering! But as it is, Laura, we must
      look to enduring the consequence all our lives, and give each other what support we may.'
Laura could hardly brook his self-accusation, but she could no longer argue the point; and
      there was far more peace and truth before them than when she believed him infallible, and
      therefore justified herself for all she had done in blind obedience to him.

