
CHAPTER XVIII.

This just decree alone I know,
Man must be disciplined by woe.
To me, whate'er of good or ill
The future brings, since come it will,
I'll bow my spirit, and be still.
Æschylus , ( Anstice's Translation.)
Guy , in the meantime, was enduring the storm in loneliness, for he was unwilling to explain
      the cause of his trouble to his companions. The only occasion of the suspicions, which he
      could think of, was his request for the sum of money; and this he could not mention to Mr.
      Wellwood, nor was he inclined to make confidants of his other companions, though pleasant,
      right-minded youths.
He had only announced that he had had a letter which had grieved him considerably, but of
      which he could not mention the contents; and, as Harry Graham, who knew something of the
      Broadstone neighbourhood, had picked up a report that Sir Guy Morville was to marry Lady
      Eveleen de Courcy, there was an idea among the party that there was some trouble in the way of
      his attachment. He had once before been made, by some joke, to colour and look conscious; and
      now this protected him from inconvenient questions, and accounted for his depression. He was
      like what he had been on first coming to Hollywell—grave and silent, falling into reveries
      when others were talking, and much given to long, lonely wanderings. Accustomed as he had been
      in boyhood to a solitary life in beautiful scenery, there was something in a fine landscape
       that was to him like a friend and companion; and he sometimes felt that it would
      have been worse if he had been in a dull, uniform country, instead of among mountain peaks and
      broad, wooded valleys. Working hard, too, helped him not a little, and conic sections served
      him almost as well as they served Laura.
A more real help was the neighbourhood of Stylehurst. On the first Sunday after receiving
      Mr. Edmonstone's letter, he went to church there, instead of with the others, to St.
      Mildred's. They thought it was for the sake of the solitary walk; but he had other reasons for
      the preference. In the first place, it was a Communion Sunday, and in the next, he could feel
      more kindly towards Philip there, and he knew he needed all that could strengthen such a
      disposition.
Many a question did he ask himself, to certify whether he wilfully entertained malice, or
      hatred, or any uncharitableness. It was a long, difficult examination; but at its close, he
      felt convinced that, if such passions knocked at the door of his heart, it was not at his own
      summons, and that he drove them away without listening to them. And surely he might approach
      to gain the best aid in that battle, especially as he was certain of his strong and deep
      repentance for his fit of passion, and longing earnestly for the pledge of forgiveness.
The pardon and peace he sought came to him, and in such sort that the comfort of that day,
      when fresh from the first shock, and waiting in suspense for some new blow, was such as never
      to be forgotten. They linked themselves with the grave shade of the clustered grey columns,
      and the angel heads on the roof of that old church; with the long grass and tall yellow
      mullens among its churchyard graves, and with the tints of the elm-trees that closed it in,
      their leaves in masses either of green or yellow, and opening here and there to show the
      purple hills beyond.
He wandered in the churchyard between the services. All enmity to Philip was absent now; and
      he felt as if
       it would hardly return when he stood by the graves of the Archdeacon and of the
      two Frances Morvilles, and thought what that spot was to his cousin. There were a few flowers
      planted round Mrs. Morville's grave, but they showed that they had long been neglected, and no
      such signs of care marked her daughter Fanny's. And when Guy further thought of Mrs. Henley,
      and recollected how Philip had sacrificed all his cherished prospects and hopes of
      distinction, and embraced an irksome profession, for the sake of these two sisters, he did not
      find it difficult to excuse the sternness, severity, and distrust which were an evidence how
      acutely a warm heart had suffered.
Though he suffered cruelly from being cut off from Amy, yet his reverence for her helped him
      to submit. He had always felt as if she was too far above him; and though he had, beyond his
      hopes, been allowed to aspire to the thought of her, it was on trial, and his failure, his
      return to his old evil passions, had sunk him beneath her. He shuddered to think of her being
      united to anything so unlike herself, and which might cause her so much misery; it was
      wretchedness to think that even now she might be suffering for him; and yet not for worlds
      would he have lost the belief that she was so feeling, or the remembrance of the looks which
      had shone on him so sweetly and timidly as she sat at her mother's feet; though that
      remembrance was only another form of misery. But Amy would be tranquil, pure and good,
      whatever became of him, and he should always be able to think of her, looking like one of
      those peaceful spirits, with bending head, folded hands, and a star on its brow, in the
      Paradiso of Flaxman. Her serenity would be untouched; and though she might be lost to
      him, he could still be content while he could look up at it through his turbid life. Better
      she were lost to him than that her peace should be injured.
He still, of course, earnestly longed to prove his innocence, though his hopes lessened;
      for, as long as
       the evidence was withheld, he had no chance. After writing as strongly as he
      could, he could do no more except watch for something that might unravel the mystery; and
      Charles's warm sympathy and readiness to assist him were a great comfort.
He had not seen his uncle again; perhaps Sebastian was ashamed to meet him after their last
      encounter, and was still absent on his engagement; but the wife and child were still at St.
      Mildred's, and one afternoon, when Guy had rather unwillingly gone thither with Mr. Wellwood,
      he saw Mrs. Dixon sitting on one of the benches which were placed on the paths cut out on the
      side of the hill, looking very smart and smiling, among several persons of her own class.
To be ashamed to recognise her was a weakness beneath him; he spoke to her, and was leaving
      her, pluming herself on his notice, when he saw little Marianne's blue eyes fixed wistfully
      upon him, and held out his hand to her. She ran up to him joyfully, and he led her a few steps
      from her mother's party. 'Well, little one, how are you? I have your piece of spar quite safe.
      Have you said how d'ye do to Bustle?'
'Bustle! Bustle!' called the soft voice; but it needed a whistle from his master to bring
      him to be caressed by the little girl.
'Have you been taking any more pleasant walks?'
'Oh yes. We have been all round these pretty paths. And I should like to get to the top of
      this great high hill, and see all round; but mamma says she has got a bone in her leg, and
      cannot go.'
'Do you think mamma would give you leave to go up with me? Should you like it?'
She coloured all over; too happy even to thank him.
'Then,' said Guy, to his tutor, 'I will meet you here when you have done your business in
      the town, in an hour or so. Poor little thing, she has not many pleasures.'
Mrs. Dixon made no difficulty, and was so profuse in thanks that Guy got out of her way as
      fast as he could, and was soon on the soft thymy grass of the hill side,
       the little girl frisking about him in great delight, playing with Bustle, and
      chattering merrily.
Little Marianne was a delicate child, and her frolics did not last long. As the ascent
      became steeper, her breath grew shorter, and she toiled on in a resolute uncomplaining manner
      after his long, vigorous steps, till he looked round, and seeing her panting far behind,
      turned to help her, lead her, and carry her till the top was achieved, and the little girl
      stood on the topmost stone, gazing round at the broad sunny landscape, with the soft green
      meadows, the harvest fields, the woods in their gorgeous autumn raiment, and the moorland on
      the other side, with its other peaks and cairns, brown with withered bracken, and shadowed in
      moving patches by the floating clouds. The exhilarating wind brought a colour into her pale
      cheeks, and her flossy curls were blowing over her face.
He watched her in silence, pleased and curious to observe how so beautiful a scene struck
      the childish eye of the little Londoner. The first thing she said, after three or four
      minutes' contemplation—a long time for such a child—was, 'Oh! I never saw any thing so
      pretty!' then presently after, 'oh! I wish little brother Felix was here!'
'This is a pleasant place to think about your little brother,' said Guy, kindly; and she
      looked up in his face, and exclaimed, 'Oh! do you know about Felix?'
'You shall tell me,' said Guy. 'Here, sit on my knee, and rest after your scramble.'
'Mamma never lets me talk of Felix, because it makes her cry,' said Marianne; 'but I wish it
      sometimes.'
Her little heart was soon open. It appeared that Felix was the last who had died, the
      nearest in age to Marianne, and her favourite playfellow. She told of some of their sports in
      their London home, speaking of them with eagerness and fondness that showed what joys they had
      been, though to Guy they seemed but the very proof of dreariness and dinginess. She talked of
       walks to school when Felix would tell what he would do when he was a man, and
      how he took care of her at the crossings, and how rude boys used to drive them, and how they
      would look in at the shop windows and settle what they would buy if they were rich. Then she
      talked of his being ill—ill so very long, how he sat in his little chair, and could not play,
      and then always lay in bed, and she liked to sit by him there; but at last he died, and they
      carried him away in a great black coffin, and he would never come back again. But it was so
      dull now, there was no one to play with her.
Though the little girl did not cry, she looked very mournful, and Guy tried to comfort her,
      but she did not understand him. 'Going to heaven' only conveyed to her a notion of death and
      separation; and this phrase, together with a vague idea who had made her, and that she ought
      to be good, seemed to be the extent of the poor child's religious knowledge. She hardly ever
      had been at church; and though she had read one or two Bible stories, it seemed to have been
      from their having been used as lessons at school. She had a dim notion that good people read
      the Bible, and there was one on the little table at home, with the shell-turkey-cock standing
      upon it, and mamma read it when Felix died; but it was a big book, and the shell-turkey-cock
      always stood upon it; in short, it seemed only connected with mamma's tears and the loss of
      her brother.
Guy was very much shocked, and so deep in thought that he could hardly talk to the child in
      their progress down the hill; but she was just so tired as to be inclined to silence, and
      quite happy clinging to his hand, till he delivered her over to her mother at the foot of the
      hill, and went to join his tutor, at the place appointed.
'Wellwood,' said he, breaking silence, when they had walked about half way back to the farm,
      'do you think your cousin would do me a great kindness? You saw that child? Well, if the
      parents' consent, it would be
       the greatest charity on earth if Miss Wellwood would receive her into her
      school.'
'On what terms? What sort of an education is she to have?
'The chief thing she wants is to be taught Christianity, poor child; the rest Miss Wellwood
      may settle. She is my first cousin. I don't know whether you are acquainted with our family
      history?' and he went on to explain as much as was needful. It ended in a resolution that if
      Miss Wellwood would undertake the charge, the proposal should be made to Mrs. Dixon.
It was a way of assisting his relations likely to do real good, and on the other hand, he
      would be able, under colour of the payment for the child, to further Miss Wellwood's schemes,
      and give her the interest of the thousand pounds, until his five and twentieth year might put
      his property in his own power.
Miss Wellwood readily consented, much pleased with the simplicity and absence of false shame
      he showed in the whole transaction, and very anxious for the good of a child in a class so
      difficult to reach. He next went to Mrs. Dixon, expecting more difficulty with her, but he
      found none. She thought it better Marianne should live at St. Mildred's than die in London,
      and was ready to catch at the prospect of her being fitted for a governess. Indeed, she was so
      strongly persuaded that the rich cousin might make Marianne's fortune, that she would have
      been very unwilling to interfere with the fancy he had taken for her.
Little Marianne was divided between fear of leaving mamma and liking for St. Mildred's but
      her first interview with Miss Wellwood, and Miss Jane's showing her a little white bed, quite
      turned the scale in their favour. Before the time came for Guy's return to Oxford, he had seen
      her settled, heard her own account of her happy life, and had listened to Miss Jane Wellwood's
      delight in her sweet temper and good disposition.
Those thousand pounds; Guy considered again and
       again whether he could explain their destination, and whether this would clear
      him. It seemed to him only a minor charge, and besides his repugnance to mention such a
      design, he saw too many obstacles in his way. Captain Morville and his sister were the very
      persons from whom Miss Wellwood's project was to be kept secret. Besides, what would be
      gained? It was evident that Guy's own assertions were doubted, and he could bring no
      confirmation of them; he had never spoken of his intention to his tutor, and Mr. Wellwood
      could, therefore, say nothing in his favour. If Mr. Edmonstone alone had been concerned, or if
      this had been the only accusation, Guy might have tried to explain it; but with Philip he knew
      it would be useless, and therefore would not enter on the subject. He could only wait
      patiently.

