
CHAPTER VII.
SOME time after this conversation with Cosmo Chough, a circumstance took place
      which caused great momentary excitement, and considerably unsettled Miss Brown’s mind. The
      summer had come with a sudden rush; and Hamlin had had the notion of taking his aunt and Miss
      Brown, and two or three friends, to spend a week at Wotton. Among these friends was Madame
      Elaguine. That Hamlin should care to take his cousin to the house where she had played so
      lamentable a part in her childhood; that Sacha should endure to confront those invisible
      ghosts of her uncle, her cousins, her own former self, of all the shameful past, which haunted
      that house, was quite incomprehensible
       to Anne. But day by day she was forced to recognise that
      she was surrounded by incomprehensible ways of feeling and thinking, that she was, in a way,
      like a person solitary among mankind from deafness or blindness, from incapacity to put
      herself in their place; and recognising this, she recognised also, with her unflinching
      justice, that she had no right to hastily condemn the things which she could not understand.
      So when Madame Elaguine, on the evening of her arrival at Wotton, insisted on wandering all
      over the once familiar house, and openly said that she felt a pleasure, the bitter pleasure of
      self‐inflicted penance, in confronting the past, in humiliating her present self by the
      company of her former self, Anne merely said to herself that she could not conceive a woman
      feeling like that—but that, nevertheless, this theatrical and hysterical excitement might,
      after all, lead to as good a result as her own silent and painful solitary
      self‐absorption.

“She is a brazen creature!” Aunt Claudia had cried, when she heard that Sacha was going to
      Wotton; “corrupt like her father, and fantastic like her mother. She must get Mrs Spencer or
      some one else to chaperon her in that house, if indeed she wants any one. I shall stay behind.
      As to you, Annie, you are at liberty to go or not go, of course.”
“I shall go, Aunt Claudia,” Anne had answered resolutely, “because I don’t see that I have a
      right to imply by my absence that I disapprove of Madame Elaguine’s going to Wotton. I neither
      approve nor disapprove; and I think that, however little we may sympathise with her notions of
      self‐humiliation, we must give her the benefit of supposing that she is honest in them.”
So Anne had gone.
The self‐humiliation of Madame Elaguine, and the hours she had spent in her room—she had
      asked for the room which had been hers as a child—crying over the past, did not prevent her
      being in excessively high spirits the
       evening following their arrival and the successive one. It
      would seem as if the painful associations in which she had steeped herself had produced a
      reaction in her whole nature. She was childishly, almost uproariously gay, played with little
      Helen the greater part of the afternoon, and after dinner treated the company—that is to say,
      Anne, Mrs Spencer, Lewis, and Hamlin—to a perfect concert of all manner of wild gipsy songs,
      Spanish and Russian, sung with a fury which amounted almost to genius; and followed these up
      with little French songs, old and new, picked up heaven knows where—from operettes, from
      peasants, from books—the words of which and the astonishing gaminerie with which they were delivered, amused Lewis to fits of laughing, threw
      Chough into enthusiasm, annoyed Hamlin a little, puzzled poor Mrs Spencer, and made Anne
      reflect, as charitably as she could, upon the different standards of propriety which seemed to
      exist for Englishwomen and for Russians.

Madame Elaguine’s songs made Anne feel quite uncomfortable and angry; but she said nothing,
      seeing Mrs Spencer, who could tolerate any amount of impropriety as long as it was medieval
      and poetic, was evidently putting down this French levity as a mark of the Russian woman’s
      depravity; and she felt somehow, that though she was annoyed herself, and annoyed with good
      cause, she must not back up Mrs Spencer’s prejudiced indignation.
Cousin Sacha seemed to take a pleasure in vexing Hamlin, in shocking Anne, in making Mrs
      Spencer think her a wicked creature; she sang on, in her devil‐may‐care, street‐boy way, with
      a malicious, childish impudence in her face; then suddenly, when she saw Hamlin get positively
      black at what he considered her bad taste—suddenly dropped from her leste French couplets into a strange, wild, Spanish gipsy song, sad and despairing
      beyond saying.
She looked very fascinating, as she sat near the window, resting her guitar on her knee,
       her tiny feet and embroidered stockings very visible
      beneath the lace flounces and frills of her thistle‐down dress; her deep, Russian blue eyes
      looking, as it seemed, rather into the past than the present, her whole slight, even
      emaciated, body and face tense with a sort of hysterical emotion.
Suddenly she threw the guitar on the sofa.
“Bah!” she cried, “what is the use of singing sad things when one is sad? and what is the
      use of pretending to be merry, and shocking people with polissoneries when one feels as old and dismal as at ninety? I hate music.”
And she walked through the French window on to the wide terrace which surrounded one side of
      the house and overlooked the lawn.
“The only good thing,” she said, “in this world is tobacco‐smoke. If,” turning with affected
      deference and timidity to Mrs Spencer, who considered a woman who smoked as little short of an
      adventuress, “you have no objection, these gentlemen and I will have a smoke.”

“Oh, pray don’t mind me,” snorted Mrs Spencer, stalking back into the drawing‐room, and
      sitting down near the window.
The three men immediately produced cigars and cigarettes and matches.
“No, thank you, Walter,” said Madame Elaguine; “your cigarettes are too weak for me—too
      ladylike, like their owner, for a badly brought up woman. I must make mine myself.” And she
      went into her bedroom, the last room opening out to the terrace, to fetch her box of tobacco
      and her cigarette‐papers.
In a minute she returned, whistling, in a curious bird‐like whistle, below her breath, and
      rolling a cigarette in her fingers. Some of the party were seated, some standing. Madame
      Elaguine came to where Miss Brown was seated, looking into the twilight park.
“Dear Annie,” she murmured, putting her arm round Miss Brown’s neck, in her childish way,
      and which yet always affected Anne as might the caress of a lamia’s clammy scales.

“I fear,” she said, putting her face close to Anne, and lowering her voice to a whisper,
      “that you must have thought me horribly vulgar and undignified and indecent just now. I don’t
      know why I sang all those nasty songs; I suppose it was to vex Walter. I don’t like them
      myself. But sometimes a sort of horrible desire, a kind of demon inside me, makes me wish to
      do something which I know is disgusting; I feel as if I could be the lowest of women, just
      from perversity. Ah, it is sickening.”
Anne did not answer.
“Where did you learn those wonderful little Burgundian couplets, Sacha?” asked Lewis, in his
      sultan‐like familiar way. He had a trick of calling her Sacha every now and then, as he had
      tried, but failed, to call Miss Brown Annie.
“I don’t know. I ought not to have learned them at all; and I ought not to have sung them
      before a man like you, who notices all the nastiness there is in anything, and a great
       deal more besides,” answered Madame Elaguine, coldly.
“What a Southern evening!” exclaimed Cosmo Chough, looking up at the blue evening sky,
      singularly pure and blue and high, twinkling with stars, and against which the distant trees
      stood out clear like the sidescenes of a theatre. “It is sad that our cigars should have to do
      for fireflies,—to be the only thing imitating that,” and he pointed at the sky.
“A lit cigar is the only imitation of the stars which people like ourselves can attempt,”
      said the Russian. “It’s so in everything—our poetry, our passions—nothing but cigar‐lights for
      stars; don’t you think so, Annie?”
“What’s that?” asked Chough, suddenly.
They looked up at his startled voice.
“What’s what?” asked Madame Elaguine, quietly. “Have you seen the ghost of Imperia of Rome,
      Mr Chough?”
“What the deuce is that?” exclaimed Lewis. In the midst of the general blue
       dusk, one of the cedars on the lawn, and a screen of trees
      beyond, had suddenly burst into sight, enveloped in a bright light, which made the grass all
      round burn out a vivid yellowish‐green against the darkness.
Anne turned round quickly and looked behind her.
“The house is on fire!” she cried. “Madame Elaguine’s room!” And before the others could
      understand, she had rushed towards the other end of the terrace.
The light, which had suddenly illumined the piece of lawn, the trees opposite, did issue, a
      brilliant broad sheet like that of large chandelier, from out of the open window of Sacha’s
      room.
“Good heavens!” cried Hamlin, “you must have set the curtains on fire with the match of your
      cigarette!”
“No, no,” cried Madame Elaguine, “I lit my cigarette here outside; it must be . . .” and she
      rushed wildly after Anne into her bedroom.

An extraordinary spectacle met Miss Brown first, and the rest of the party an instant or two
      later.
The large old‐fashioned bed of Cousin Sacha, which stood in the centre of the room, was
      burning, blazing like a Christmas pudding, its whole top, coverlet and pillows, turned into a
      roaring mass of bluish flame, whence arose an acrid stifling smell.
“They have done it! they have done it!” shrieked Madame Elaguine, throwing herself into
      Hamlin’s arms. “They want to kill me! they have always said so!”
But before he had had time to answer, she had rushed off into a neighbouring room, and, with
      a presence of mind most unexpected in her, returned with a heap of woollen blankets which she
      had dragged off a bed.
“Pour the water on this!” she cried to Anne, who, with her strong arms, had immediately
      dashed the contents of a bath on to the flames. “Soak this! it is useless throwing water on
      the flames;” and taking the soaking
       blankets, the little woman threw them dexterously on to the
      blazing bed, among the hissing of the smoke and fire.
In a minute every one had brought blankets, cushions, water; the servants had run up; and in
      about five minutes the flames were extinguished.
The damages were very trifling compared with the appearance of danger. The fire had not
      spread beyond the surface of the bed, and consumed only the upper layer of bedding. But the
      sight of that expanse of waving blue flame had been frightful, and it seemed impossible to
      realise that no harm had been done.
“How has it happened?”—“How have they done it?”—“Send to the police station.”—“Scour the
      park!”—every one was talking at the same time.
“I’ll go down into the park and have a good hunt,” said Hamlin, taking down one of the guns
      which hung in the hall; “they can’t have got far yet.”

“I don’t think you’ll catch them,” answered Lewis, in his drawling ironical way.
“We’re not in Russia, Mr Lewis,” rejoined Mrs Spencer, bridling up; “here any
      one can be caught; it’s not an incompetent police as abroad.”
“Some things can’t be caught,” said Lewis, with an odd wise smile.
While they were standing discussing in the hall, they were startled by a sudden thump on the
      floor. Madame Elaguine, who had hitherto been singularly calm and energetic, had fallen in a
      half‐fainting condition, like a column on to the ground. She was carried in to a couch in the
      drawing‐room, and Anne called the Swiss maid, who came, with that sort of insolent
      indifference to the condition of her mistress, which had struck Miss Brown on more than one
      similar occasion. Madame Elaguine was in a state of hysterical panic—she wept, and laughed,
      and talked, and moaned; but she absolutely refused to be put to bed, and insisted with great
      violence that
       some of the company should remain about her. She kept
      Hamlin seated by the side of the sofa, his hand in hers, until the arrival of the police, and
      of neighbours who had heard of the burning bed, obliged him and the men to leave her. As soon
      as only Mrs Spencer and Anne Brown remained, she became more calm, and merely lamented over
      her fate, and over the probability that some day her enemies would really succeed in killing
      either her or her child.
A curious coincidence occurred, which remained impressed in Anne’s mind. While the rest of
      the party, including Mrs Spencer, were examining the house in company with the policemen, Miss
      Brown, who was seated near Madame Elaguine’s sofa—a sense of unreality, as of being at the
      play, filling her whole nature after that terrible sight of the blazing bed—mechanically
      opened a book which was lying on the table at her elbow. It was a child’s story which she had
      bought on a railway bookstall and given to little Helen Elaguine
       to keep her quiet during the journey to Wotton.
      Mechanically her eye ran along the page; but suddenly it stopped, as she read the following
      sentence, printed in rather larger type than the rest—
“And they never forgot, as long as they lived, that terrible burning bed.”
For a moment the words echoed through Anne’s mind as merely so much sound; but, as is the
      case when we hear a name which awakens associations which we cannot at first define to
      ourselves, she was conscious at the same time of an effort to adjust her faculties, to seize a
      meaning which was there, but which she could not at once grasp.
“And they never forgot, as long as they lived, that terrible burning bed.”
Anne kept on repeating those words to herself. They made her restless. She went to the
      window, and looked out into the night. The vision of that broad sheet of white light on the
      terrace and bushes, of that expanse of waving blue flamelets, rose up in her mind.

“That terrible burning bed.” She saw the printed page again. Then, as to a central bubble,
      other ideas which bubbled up slowly began to gravitate. Madame Elaguine’s perfect, and, in a
      woman so excitable, unaccountable presence of mind until all chance of further mischief had
      been over; the blankets which she had immediately dragged out of the next room, as a fireman
      might have dragged them; the rapid instruction, as of a person accustomed to such things, to
      wet the blankets instead of pouring water on the flames, as all the others had done; the
      insolent, indifferent look of the maid; the going into her room to fetch the cigarette‐papers
      only a minute or two before the conflagration, and when it would seem that whoever had set the
      bed aflame must have been making the necessary preparations. Then also, the fire had been so
      carefully limited to the bed, as if no real damage had been meant. No; that was merely
      consistent with the usual policy of Madame Elaguine’s mysterious enemies, who wished to
       frighten, but not to kill her. But another thought arose.
      Madame Elaguine possessed a good deal of valuable old lace, indeed more than her fortune at
      all warranted. Old lace was her hobby and her pride; she had always a lot on her dress, on her
      night‐gown, on everything. Some of the very finest that she possessed existed in large
      quantity as the trimming of a white satin dressing‐gown, which, towards the evening, was
      always put on her bed. Anne had noticed it this very evening, when Madame Elaguine had called
      her into her bedroom to ask her advice, as, with a spoilt child’s coquetry, she often did,
      about some flowers which she was putting in her hair for dinner. For some reason the maid had
      already arranged the room for the night, and, as usual, the white satin dressing‐gown trimmed
      with lace had been lying on the bed. Anne had made a note of the fact, because she had thought
      at the moment how absurd it was of the Russian to put such valuable lace upon a garment which
      was perpetually knocking
       about, and in which, as it seemed to Miss Brown, she would
      scarcely be seen except by her own servant. Now, while extinguishing the flames, one of Anne’s
      first thoughts had somehow been the white satin dressing‐gown. What a pity that all that lace
      should have been consumed! What an annoyance to Cousin Sacha! But, to her surprise and relief,
      she had seen the dressing‐gown, a mass of satin and lace, hanging in perfect safety on a peg
      at the furthest end of the room—the dressing‐gown which, an hour before, had already lain in
      readiness on the bed.
All these ideas moved confusedly through Miss Brown’s brain. Was it a mere ordinary mental
      delusion, one of those impressions which physiologists explain by the imperfect momentary
      double action of the two brain‐lobes; or was it a recollection of a suspicion which had long
      existed in her mind, but unconsciously, not daring to come to the surface? Anyhow, it seemed
      to Anne, as she stood by the open window looking into the night, and listening
       to Sacha’s faint moanings, as if she had gone through that
      or something similar before—as if it were not the first time that she was invaded by the
      thought that all this persecution by invisible and uncatchable enemies was a deception
      practised by Madame Elaguine herself, a kind of artificial excitement and interest got up for
      the benefit of her friends, for the benefit of her own morbid and theatrical temper? It was
      difficult for a woman, simple, sincere, completely all of a piece, like Anne Brown, to
      conceive such a possibility, and still more difficult for her not to revolt from its
      contemplation as from an act of disloyalty. But, on the other hand, Anne, just in proportion
      to her slowness of mental perception, had not the power, which so many of us possess, of
      denying the evidence of her reason for the sake of her feelings. So the words in the book,
      which seemed as if they contained the suggestion of the whole performance (if performance it
      was); the fact of the dressing‐gown having been out of reach of all danger; the manner of
      Madame
       Elaguine and of her maid on this and previous
      occasions,—haunted Anne, and united with the sudden recollection of what she had read in one
      of Marjory Leigh’s scientific books about the connection between hysteria and monomania, about
      the strange passion for deceit, for hoax, for theatricality, sometimes observable in
      hysterical women. And then she remembered the face and voice of Edmund Lewis, his ironical
      remark about the impossibility of finding the culprits, his indifference and amused
      superiority. Could he too have guessed?—and, it suddenly struck her, could Hamlin have had the
      same thought? No, she felt sure Hamlin had not.
