
CHAPTER IX.
MISS BROWN went up to her room slowly, and slowly proceeded to undress.
“You look very tired, miss,” said her maid; “haven’t you perhaps been overtiring yourself so
      soon after your illness? and don’t you think you had better let me brush your hair for
      you?”
Anne shook her head; she had never consented to let any one wait upon her except when ill,
      with that odd feeling that she, a servant, had no right to have a servant; and the maid whom
      Hamlin considered as a sort of necessary institution for a woman in Miss Brown’s position, had
      been virtually put at the disposal of Mrs Macgregor, whose constant fidgeting over her
      clothes, and tea, and coffee,
       and food, according to hygienic theories of thirty years
      back, might have afforded occupation not to two but to twenty maids. Anne really did look very
      worn out; more so than she had seemed these several weeks, thought the maid.
“No, thank you, Laura,” said Miss Brown. She really did not feel at all as if she could
      sleep; she felt the blood rushing through every artery of her body, and a hot faintness
      overtake her.
“It won’t do to make myself ill again,” she said to herself. The doctor had said that for
      the present she must try and get as much sleep as possible; and she was a practical,
      methodical person. She brushed her hair, still in short wavy masses since it was cut during
      the fever, carefully, slowly. It seemed to her as if, in the half light, it looked more grey
      than black. She pulled out a few white hairs: they come early in hair as dark and wiry as
      hers. She folded her clothes methodically, as she used to fold the clothes of
       the little Perrys, put out her light and lay down.
“It won’t do to make myself ill again,” she said; and, closing her eyes, determined to
      sleep.
She remained stretched out rigidly, like a dead woman, her head straight on her pillows, and
      trying to keep her mind as rigid as her body. But it was of no use. She could not sleep; her
      blood and her thoughts seemed to throb furiously within her.
Anne’s mind had been made up, quietly, methodically, much in the same way as her hair had
      been brushed and her clothes folded, already a good hour ago, when talking to Melton Perry;
      she had seen the necessity of a decision coming, had waited for the moment when the decision
      should be made, ever since she had heard that story of Madame Elaguine and Constantine Bulzo.
      There had been, it seemed to her, no alternative; and there seemed to her that there was no
      alternative now, either. But as she lay motionless in
       her bed, and stared into the darkness with wide‐opened
      eyes, she began, once more, to go over slowly and repeatedly the steps of the argument, which
      had, three or four days ago, become manifest to her as might the mechanism of a broken watch
      to a watchmaker, of any very inevitable and obvious thing.
Hamlin had done everything for her; he had turned what she looked back upon with horror, as
      a kind of intellectual and moral death, into life. He had bought her soul free, had nourished
      and nurtured it, as a man might have redeemed, nourished, and nurtured the body of some slave
      child, doomed to be a cripple in a crippling occupation; he had done, she felt assured, what
      no other man had ever done for a woman, since no other woman, she thought, could have escaped
      from such a state of utter soul stagnation as had already begun, those five years ago, in her
      slow, sullen nature. It was more than had ever been done for another woman, and Anne felt its
      value
       more than any other; for despite the modesty and frankness
      which often took others aback, the very stuff of her soul, like the very mould of her
      features, was pride. She knew herself to be nobler than the majority of men and women; not
      more intelligent, nor more honest, nor more kindly, nor any one particular quality, but more
      homogeneous of nature; not alloyed in any portion, whatever she might be; upright, sincere,
      practical, harsh even, through and through: a reality, where they seemed but half reality and
      half make‐up. And that she should be this she owed to Hamlin; without him she would have been
      equally homogeneous of soul, but it would have been with the uniformity, the rigidity of
      spiritual death.
What Hamlin had done, he had done from no base motives, and without the smallest taint of
      baseness in the doing: he had not actually wanted her, he had wanted merely to perfect a thing
      that seemed to him good of its sort, to make her a soul that should suit
       her body; he had done it deliberately, consistently,
      unwearyingly, with a gentleness, a generous tact, which had themselves been a benefit.
That Hamlin had acted from an imaginative whim, that he had carried out an exotic artistic
      caprice, played a sublimated game of artistic skill, Anne could not at this moment take into
      account. She knew, and only too well, that Hamlin was selfish, whimsical, fantastic, vain, a
      seeker after new poses and new sensations; but she knew all
      this analytically, piecemeal as the result of thought; and she was in a sense too dull, too
      unable to comprehend others, and, above all, too utterly devoid of all vanity, whimsicalness,
      and theatricality, too completely of a piece, a mass of granite, as she often felt, to
      conceive these analytically recognised peculiarities as absolutely organic and active forces.
      She had conceived Hamlin to be that which to her was the easiest conception—generous; and
      nothing could make her conceive his behaviour towards her in any
       any other light. Moreover, there remained in this frank and
      fearless nature, shrinking from no disillusions, one delusion which was the safer for her very
      consciousness of uncompromising hatred of all delusions. She clung, without knowing it, to the
      belief that in one thing at least Hamlin had been perfectly noble, that no subsequently
      discovered weakness and baseness could ever alter that; she treasured up a shred of her old
      ideal, the belief that whatever Hamlin might be towards others and towards himself, towards
      her he had been the real Hamlin whom she had loved and worshipped.
And now this Hamlin, this man to whom she owed all, and whose past she still loved, was
      gradually being alienated from all the nobler things for which he was fit—gradually being
      separated from his nobler self, and dragged, stripped of all his better qualities, into a
      moral quagmire, a charnel, a cloaca, to stick and rot inchwise. And this, Anne said to
      herself, to some degree by her own
       fault; for had she not let her antipathy for the tendencies
      which she had gradually discovered in him, and her loathing for the tendencies of the men who
      surrounded him, smother her gratitude, her sympathy, turn her away in sullen scorn and
      isolation, from the man whom she was bound to help, and the men whom she was bound to combat?
      She forgot for the moment the many abortive attempts she had made to awaken the better
      qualities of Hamlin; or rather, she could no longer conceive that those attempts had been
      sufficiently strenuous and determined; it seemed to her, forgetful of the dead‐weight of
      opposition, that she must have been very feeble and half‐hearted. Instead of thinking of him,
      she had thought only of herself, of preserving her own soul from infection, of keeping her own
      soul strong and active; she had selfishly thought of the world’s miseries, which she could not
      prevent, instead of thinking of Hamlin, whom she might have saved; and finally, she had let
      herself indulge in dreams of liberty, that is to say, of desertion
       of her duty. Those monks and nuns of former days, for whom
      she felt such unutterable contempt, had they acted differently from her when they left their
      fellow‐men to perish in sin, in order that they might enjoy the luxury of virtue in a convent
      or a desert? She loathed æsthetes like Hamlin; and yet, what had she herself been, save an
      æsthete of another sort, selfishly preoccupied with spiritual comfort, and worse than any of
      them for the very moral consciousness which lay at the root of this immorality?
Why had she not driven away Edmund Lewis, opposing herself to him with all her might? Why
      had she not driven away Sacha Elaguine? Now that she had learned from Melton Perry what this
      woman really was, every single circumstance of their former intercourse, every single fact and
      suggestion that had come to her, from Mrs Macgregor’s warnings to Edmund Lewis’s cowardly
      accusation,—all the hundred little impressions which she herself had received, grouped
      themselves
       together, and made it obvious that Sacha must be, could
      only have been, the horrible walking depravity which she had been revealed. Essentially
      unanalytic of mind, Miss Brown could now no longer conceive how it was that she had not
      understood Madame Elaguine at once; in that massive horror with which the Russian woman had
      filled her, it was impossible to remember all the deluding little circumstances which had
      closed her heart to suspicion—nay, all the purity of her own nature, the charity, the desire
      to be equitable, which had made this now so overpowering mass of abomination not merely
      impossible to realise, but impossible to conceive. It seemed to her as if Sacha must always
      have shown herself what she was; and that she, Anne Brown, must have wilfully closed her eyes.
      She had never asked herself whether it was not her duty towards Hamlin to come to some
      conclusion about his cousin; she had let their connection drift on; she had seen in the ruin
      of the man to whom she owed all, only a means to her
       own deliverance from a life which she hated, from a duty
      which she shirked. Anne remembered how she had watched with terror that look of weariness and
      shame on Hamlin’s face, which ought to have told her that this poor, weak, sick soul might
      still be saved; she remembered the joy with which she had heard of Hamlin’s departure for
      Paris—that is to say, of the crowning act of weakness and folly which had made him the chattel
      of his cousin. Anne loathed herself as a woman might loathe herself, who recognised that she
      had let some living creature die of hunger and want of nursing. Shame she did not feel, nor
      yet remorse; she cared too little for herself to care for her own ideals; she did not once
      think that she had been mistaken, that she had been base, ungrateful, that she was dishonoured
      in her own eyes; she merely thought that Hamlin was on the brink of ruin, ruin of all his
      nobler self and of his happiness—that she had done it, and that she was there, alone, to save
      him. In those long hours, lying motionless in the
       dark, the face of Hamlin, as she had recently seen it, that
      weak, profoundly depressed, half‐degraded face, was constantly before her eyes; and
      surrounding it, vague and threatening, the faces—so strangely like it and transfigured in a
      kind of tragic degradation, of the portraits at Wotton Hall—of Hamlin’s half‐crazy, disgraced
      brother; of his odious, passion‐stained father; of his drunken uncles; above all, that
      beautiful woman’s face, with the curled hair and loose collar—that face so curiously
      compounded of effeminacy, whimsicalness, and cynical self‐abandonment; of his great‐uncle
      Mordaunt, whose portrait had been exiled to the lumber‐room, whose name banished from the
      memory of his relatives; and along with them, and resembling them like a brother, the
      confused, imaginary image of that miserable Greek lad whom Sacha Elaguine had ruined.
Was it still time? Could Hamlin still be saved? was he already hopelessly bound for life to
      Madame Elaguine? Had Anne waked
       up too late? She did not know. She only knew that there was
      not an hour, not a moment to lose; and that there was but one thing to be done. Hamlin must
      not, should not, marry Sacha. And the only way to prevent it was that he should marry Anne
      Brown. He might, as Lewis said, and as she believed, already be the lover of Madame Elaguine;
      but he was not yet the husband, and most probably not yet the betrothed. And was he not bound,
      by that paper which the ignoble suspiciousness of Richard Brown had required of him in that
      distant past in Florence, to marry Anne Brown at whatever time she rnight call upon him to do
      so?
“I must become his wife,” said Anne to herself; and she said it as she might have said “the
      sun must rise in so many hours.” There was no room for hesitation on her part; the choice, the
      act of volition, was so decided, that there ceased to be either choice or volition; to become
      Hamlin’s wife seemed to Anne as an inevitable necessity coming from
       without. But little by little: as she lay there broad
      awake, yet with somewhat of that tendency, as of an opium‐dreamer, to see things exaggerated
      which comes to us in darkness, she began to realise the meaning of this formula—to become
      Hamlin’s wife. The whole past rushed into her mind, and became, as it were, the mirage of the
      future, and that mirage was horrible. To be Hamlin’s wife meant to relinquish the liberty
      which had, for the last two or three months, been safe within her grasp, the liberty of being
      herself. Anne was one of those natures which, though able, by moments, to enjoy themselves
      like children, do not believe much in happiness; to whom, singled out, as it were, to achieve
      self‐sacrifice or endure martyrdom, happiness is a mere name, a negative thing—but to whom
      unhappiness is a positive reality, the thing which they expect, with which their soul seems,
      in some pre‐natal condition, to have become familiar as the one great certainty. The
      happiness, therefore, which she was losing—the
       independence, the activity, the serenity, the possibility
      of a life of noble companionship with Richard Brown—all this was only a distant and
      unsubstantial thing; she had never experienced it, and it could not well be realised. But she
      knew by experience, familiar with its every detail, the unhappiness which lay in the future as
      Hamlin’s wife, for this future would be but a return to the past; and she felt as might a
      person lost in a catacomb, and who, having got to a chink, having seen the light and breathed
      the air, should be condemned to wander again, to rethread for ever the black and choking
      corridors leading nowhere. That Hamlin was lost if he married Sacha, she knew as she knew that
      two and two make four; but she did not in the least flatter herself that her own influence
      would be as potent for good, as Madame Elaguine’s must be potent for evil. She knew Hamlin too
      well for that, and herself also. If Hamlin had remained weak, cold, vain, and mean under her
      influence hitherto, he must remain
       so for ever; he was born all these things. She could
      prevent his growing worse, she could not make him grow better; her position would be as that
      of a woman who devoted herself to nurse a person sick of an incurable disease: there would be
      none of the excitement of a possible cure, only the routine, the anxiety peculiar to a case
      where the patient is for ever on the brink of getting worse.
To be understood, to be sympathised with, to be loved really and really to love—none of
      these things would be for her. But, after all, what right had she to any of them? Anne was, in
      all matters concerning herself, a born fatalist and pessimist; the words of Goethe, “Entbehren
      sollst du, sollst entbehren,” were to her not an admonition, but a mere statement of fact. She
      had, for a time, fancied that she clutched happiness; if it had turned out, like the goddess
      clutched by Ixion, a mere mist, why, that was quite natural; there was nothing to complain of
      in that.
But suddenly there came a sense not any
       longer of the loss of happiness, but of a sickened revolt
      from all the things which this sacrifice of happiness implied. Not to love, not to be loved.
      Well, that was natural; but to submit to becoming the property of a man whom she did not love,
      and who could not, in her eyes, ever love her, that was another thing. Edmund Lewis and Madame
      Elaguine, learned in such matters, had been perfectly correct when they declared that Anne
      was, in their sense of the word, passionless, cold. To this woman, consumed by intellectual
      and moral passion, her womanhood meant merely the instincts of superior chastity, of superior
      soul cleanness, which seem the birthright of women, as the instincts of superior generosity,
      of superior soul energy, seem the birthright of men; and this, to her the only result of
      womanhood, merely added a positive element of repulsion to the disdain for what the world is
      pleased to call love already existing in her. Anne Brown, born of the people, grown up as a
      servant, left to take care of herself when
       scarcely more than a child, and then thrust into the midst
      of a demoralised school of literature which gloried in moral indifference,—Anne Brown had none
      of those misty notions of marriage so easily transfigured into poetry, and which make (and
      perhaps fortunately) many clean‐souled and disdainful girls enter unconsciously and unabashed
      upon a life frequently neither very noble nor very clean. Without formulating it to
      herself—for she never formulated anything—Miss Brown had a very strong sense that marriage
      without love was a mere legalised form of prostitution. To become, therefore, the wife of
      Hamlin, was an intolerable self‐degradation—nay, a pollution; for it seemed to her, and the
      idea sickened her whole soul, that the moral pollution of Sacha Elaguine would be communicated
      to her. To become the wife of Sacha’s lover! Her limbs seemed to give way, to dissolve; a
      horrible warm clamminess overtook her; she could not breathe, or breathed only horror.
Anne rose from her bed, and wrapping herself
       in her dressing‐gown, sat down by the window, partly ajar.
      She threw it wide open, pulled up the blinds, and, gasping, looked out into the darkness. The
      sky was covered, not a ray of light; it was raining—she heard the drops fall heavily on the
      leaves under the window; a warm damp gust of air blew in her face. Anne did not know what it
      was to faint, and her limbs did not give way beneath her; but she felt as if her mind, her
      soul, were fainting, growing clammy—slipping, slipping away, dissolving into nothingness. To
      be the wife of Sacha’s lover! With the scornful aversion which a woman of actively chaste
      nature (for the virtue exists in most women only in a negative, passive condition) experiences
      for the more abstract idea of weakness and unchastity, was mingled—perhaps not very clearly to
      herself—somewhat already of the wrath of the outraged wife. Under her very eyes, before all
      the world, Hamlin had deceived her—had been another woman’s lover—and had let her associate
      with his
       mistress! the kind of resentment which the world sometimes
      mistakes for jealousy, but into which there enters no love,—the sense not of being neglected
      as an individual, but being insulted as a woman. To be the wife of Sacha’s lover! Anne’s
      imagination—slow in all things, and slowest where any ignoble or impure thing was
      concerned—was trailed as by an inexplicable force along a dim tract of foulness.
No; she could not marry this man. She had no right to forego her just resentment, to stifle
      her just disgust, no right to degrade her soul in order to save his. If he was weak, vain,
      foredoomed to baseness, let him run his career—fulfil his destiny. Some sacrifices are sins.
      Without identifying the case, Anne’s thoughts reverted to the story, to the words of Isabella
      in ‘Measure for Measure’; and the pride that lay at the bottom of her soul—the pride of purity
      and strength—rose like a great wind within her. No; she would not pollute her cleanness,
      prostitute her nobility, for this
       man. Anne folded her dressing‐gown close about her, and
      extended her strong fingers tight over the arms of her chair—a movement like that of a judge
      about to pronounce a sentence. Any one who could have seen her sitting thus by the window—who
      could have seen that pale stern face, those wide‐opened onyx‐grey eyes looking steadfastly
      into the darkness—would have said that this magnificent young woman with the tragic features
      was capable of cold cruelty.
But though in some measure right, since there is a destructive element in all strong souls,
      the person who should have thought like this would yet have been mistaken. Anne’s
      ruthlessness, her cruelty, could exist only against herself; the sacrifice, which seemed to
      her no very great matter, was the sacrifice of herself.
Anne remained seated for a few minutes by the window, that storm of pride and contempt
      rushing in great gusts through her whole nature. But then suddenly the storm dropped.

Here was Hamlin, to whom she owed everything, owed this very soul which seemed too good to
      be wasted upon him, in danger of being degraded for ever by this loathsome woman, this
      incarnation of all his own vices, this moral disease become a human creature. This fate
       must be averted, Hamlin must be saved, for his own sake and for the
      sake of the world—of all those nobler things that he might still do; he must be saved, and
      only one thing could save him—hence that one thing must be done. Anne rose from the window.
      This darkness unnerved her. She struck a light and lit the candles on the mantelpiece; they
      were in clustered candlesticks, and the room was brilliantly illuminated. Anne looked round
      her. There was a heap of books and papers on her table,—she had been interrupted in tidying
      them the previous day. She began to put them to rights. Some of the books were the manuals of
      political economy and works on philosophy which she was studying with a view to Girton.
       The sight of them made a knot rise in her throat and the
      tears come into her eyes. She felt that she would never read them again. She took them in her
      arms, and opening the lowest drawer of her writing‐table, locked them up. “I will give them to
      Marjory’s women’s club,” she thought. Then she opened another drawer, and got out all her
      note‐books and copy‐books,—her many months’ work, ever since Richard Brown had first lent her
      his primer. She turned over a few pages slowly. The sentences seemed to have no meaning; her
      brain refused to act. She took the papers one by one and tore them into small shreds, and
      threw them into the waste‐paper basket. “There is an end of that,” she said to herself
      quietly. Anne looked round the room once more,—at the spruce Queen Anne furniture which had
      surprised her so much, at the blue and white vases, the shimmering plates, the pieces of
      embroidery on the wall—all the things which Hamlin had put there to please her. Was there
      anything more—anything more to
       be done? On the mantelpiece stood a photograph of Richard
      Brown, unframed, which he had recently given her: she had asked him for a photograph during
      Hamlin’s absence with Sacha. She took the photograph and held it over one of the candles; it
      curled up, charred, only the rim which she held remaining to show what it had been; she turned
      it round and round over the flame, and then threw the crumpled piece of charred pasteboard
      into the grate.
The first pale light of dawn was beginning to mingle with the light of the candles, making
      them burn yellow, and surrounded by a sort of halo, like the tapers round a catafalque.
      Outside she saw the chilly grey streaks of light, the faint cold rose veinings of sunrise. But
      the sunrise itself did not come; the sky gradually appeared, clotted with red and purplish
      reflections; then the colour died away, and there remained instead a pale, suffused, grey
      heaven. It began to drizzle. Anne left the window. The room was light now with
       daylight—the candle‐flames mere yellow specks. Anne put
      them out; she pulled down the blinds and got into bed, and again stretched herself out in that
      stiff way, her head propped up on the pillows, trying not to think. In a few minutes she was
      asleep.
When the maid came in, she did not wake up as usual, and the girl was half‐frightened and
      very much awed by seeing Miss Brown lying straight and motionless; her face, surrounded by a
      sort of wreath of short, curling, iron‐black locks, stiff on the pillow, looking, in the grey
      morning light which came through the pale‐blue blinds, like a dead woman.
Anne opened her eyes and looked round slowly, as if trying to collect her thoughts. “Ah,”
      she said, half audibly, “I remember.”
