<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Piccadilly, by
                        Laurence Oliphant</title><author>Oliphant, Laurence (1829-1888)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1870</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">
PART VI.
THE "——."
Piccadilly, July 1. 
I am now about to venture upon the very thinnest ice upon which fool ever rushed.
                    The fact is, I am morally trembling like an aspen; but somebody must do it. I
                    have put it off for five months, and tried to work up my courage by hammering
                    away at the fashionable world, but they take it like lambs. Dear people,
                    whatever their vices may be, they never resent criticism. Whether their
                    consciences tell them they are superior to it, or whether they have not got
                    consciences, I don't know, but, on the whole, the fashionable world is an easy,
                    good-natured world; but oh, not so that other world, which is still essentially
                    "the world," and very necessary to keep unspotted from, though it is thankful
                    that it is not as that other world is, from which in its humility it takes care
                    to distinguish itself by the self-applied epithet of "religious." It grieves me
                    to think of the number of my friends whom I shall pain by presuming to touch
                    upon this subject, to say nothing of the righteous indignation I shall call down
                    from those whose function it has been to give, not take, reproof. The great art
                    of the "worldly-holies"—not, I believe, deliberately practised, but insensibly
                    acquired—is to confuse in the minds of the poor dear "wholly-worldlies" the
                    sublime religion which they profess, with their mode of professing it. So they
                    would have it to be understood that, when you find fault with their practices,
                    you are reflecting upon that very religion, the precepts of which they seem to
                    some utterly to ignore. The "religious world" is no more composed of exclusively
                    good men and women than the Episcopalian Church is. I will even venture to go
                    further, and say that the good men and women in it are a very small minority,
                    judging only from the public performances of the "worldly-holies" in matters in
                    which humility, sincerity, self-sacrifice, and toleration, are concerned. And if
                    you want a proof of it, ask your friends in the religious world if they agree in
                    what I say of it, and the very few you may find who do, will be that small
                    minority of whom I speak.
I am perfectly ready to admit that I have no more right to preach to them than
                    they have to preach to me. I only ask those among them who are sincere, to
                    believe that I am actuated by the same desire to improve them that they are to
                    do good to me. It is not merely in their own interest, but in the interest of
                    their fellow-men, that I venture to write thus, and to point out to them that,
                    if they "lived the life," instead of talking the talk, they might attract
                    instead of repelling that other world which they condemn. It is not living the
                    life to form a select and exclusive society, with its vanities and its
                    excitements, and its scandals and its envyings and jealousies, which keeps
                    itself aloof from the worldly world, on the ground that it professes and
                    represents a religion of love. Those who sit in Moses' seat are not on that
                    account examples of the "life;" on the contrary, "whatsoever they bid you
                    observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works, for they say and
                    do not."
Above all, do not confound the Pharisee with the religion, or suppose that an
                    attack on the one in any way implies irreverence towards the other. This is a
                    very important distinction to make, as I am about to describe a religious
                    entertainment at Lady Broadhem's with the religion left out, which will draw
                    down upon me much odium. There is, in fact, no stronger proof of the force and
                    despotic power of the Phariseeism of the present day, than the unpopularity
                    which one incurs by attempting to expose it. Christians, in the real sense of
                    the term, were always told to expect persecution and now, as in old time, the
                    quarter from which it comes is the religious world. It is a hard saying, and one
                    which, unfortunately, nobody has yet been found worthy to prove; but whenever he
                    comes into this city of London, who can embody in himself the life and live it,
                    he will be repudiated by the "worldly holies."
"The Countess of Broadhem requests the pleasure of Lord Frank Vanecourt's company
                    at a conversazione on Thursday the 22d, at nine o'clock.
"The Bishop of the Caribbee Islands will give some account of the mission-work in
                    his diocese."
That was the form of the card; and at nine punctually I responded to the
                    invitation which it contained.
For the benefit of those of my readers who have never been admitted within the
                    sacred precincts of the religious world, I should tell them that there is
                    nothing in their outward appearance to distinguish them from the other world.
                    The old ladies come in, followed by trains of daughters, furbelowed and flounced
                    by the same dressmakers who clothe worldly people; but there is a greater
                    variety of men—the older ones are often snuffy, and look unwashed. They
                    constantly wear thick boots, and their black waistcoats are not embroidered, and
                    button higher up, which gives them a more staid appearance. They are generally
                    pervaded by an air of complacency and calm superiority, and converse in measured
                    unctuous accents, checkered by beaming smiles when they are not contradicted.
                    The youths, on the other hand, present in most cases an intellectually weak
                    aspect. They are quite as much addicted to flirting with the young ladies as if
                    they belonged to the other world, but want that hardihood, not to say
                    impertinence, which characterises the lavender-gloved tribe who are still
                    heathens. The arrangement of the room is somewhat that of a private concert,
                    only instead of a piano is a table, behind which are seated Joseph Caribbee
                    Islands, Chundango, and several other lay and clerical performers. In the centre
                    of this table is a vase, which Joseph hopes to see filled with subscriptions
                    before the proceedings terminate. There is a suspicion, however, that things may
                    not go off quite smoothly, as a lay member present, who does a good deal of
                    amateur preaching, intends to take him to task about certain unsound views which
                    we knew our friend Joseph entertains. I am sorry to say that some of the young
                    gentlemen leaning in the doorway, where I stand, anticipate this encounter with
                    apparent satisfaction. Among them is Broadhem, who has never once taken his eyes
                    off Wild Harrie. That young lady is more plainly dressed than anybody else in
                    the room. Her hair is neatly and modestly drawn back. She might have risked a
                    larger chignon, but she had never been to an entertainment of this kind before,
                    and did not know how they dressed; her eyes are only now and then furtively
                    raised, and she takes a quick glance round the room, winding up with Broadhem;
                    and a twitching at the corners of her mouth makes me envy Amy Rumsort, who will,
                    no doubt, receive a most graphic and embellished report of the whole affair.
                    There is a good deal of murmuring and rustling and getting into places, and a
                    few hardy men manage to squeeze themselves next the crinoline of their especial
                    desire, and then they go on whispering and tittering to each other, till Joseph
                    says in a very loud tone—Ahem!
On which a general silence. It seems as impossible and incongruous for me to
                    write here what now takes place, as it did at the time to take part in it. It
                    requires no stretch of imagination on the part of my readers to divine what
                    movement it was which caused the next general rustle. Remember that a great
                    proportion of these young ladies were brought here by their mammas, and in their
                    secret souls would have rather been at a ball; but their mammas disapproved of
                    balls, and made them do this instead. Now, tell me, which was most wrong? I knew
                    of one young lady, at least, whose object in coming was not to do what she was
                    then doing. How many young men would have been there had there been no young
                    ladies? and what were they all thinking about now? And as I looked at the
                    subscription-vase, and listened to the monotonous voice of a "dear Christian
                    friend" behind it, who had been called upon to open the proceedings, I thought,
                    Can it be possible that these are those of whom it is said, "they devour widows'
                    houses, and for a pretence make long prayer"? Can it be possible to put anything
                    into that vase without the right hand knowing what the left hand is doing, and
                    all the people seeing both hands? Is not "the trumpet" even now being "sounded"
                    by "the hypocrites" that they may have "glory of men"? Is there, in fact, any
                    difference, practically, between kneeling in Lady Broadhem's drawing-room, by
                    way of an after-dinner entertainment, and loving "to pray standing in the
                    synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that you may be seen of men"? Is
                    there any part of a clergyman's dress called a phylactery; and if so, when he
                    becomes a bishop, does the hem of it become broader? and if it was wrong for a
                    priest in Jerusalem, eighteen hundred years ago, to be called "Rabbi, Rabbi," is
                    it less wrong for one in London now to be called "My lord, My lord"?
I was thinking how much more usefully Bishop Colenso would have been employed in
                    pointing out those anomalies in the practice of his religion, instead of the
                    discrepancies in its records, and what a much stronger case the Zulu might have
                    made out against Christians if he had known as much of the countries which they
                    inhabit as I do, when the rustling again became general, and the monotonous
                    voice ceased.
"Dear Christian friends," began Joseph—and here I may remark that this epithet is
                    only applied by the worldly-holies to one another—one of the chief
                    characteristics of those who belong to the religious world being constantly to
                    talk as though they were a privileged few, a chosen flock, and as though that
                    new commandment, "that ye love one another," was applicable only as among
                    themselves, and consisted chiefly in addressing one another in affectionate and
                    complimentary terms. Even these they withhold, not merely from the
                    wholly-worldlies, but from those who differ from them upon all points of
                    doctrine which they assume to be vital. Hence, by constantly toadying and
                    flattering each other, they insensibly foster that description of pride which
                    apes humility, and acquire that air of subdued arrogance which is so displeasing
                    to society at large. So when Joseph said, "Dear Christian friends," there was
                    clearly written on the self-satisfied faces of most of the audience, "that is
                    the least you can say of us," or words to that effect.
Now let me in a little more detail tell who some of these friends were. The
                    religious world in London being a very large and well-to-do world, they want
                    religious lawyers, and religious bankers, and religious doctors; they like to
                    get their wine from somebody who holds sound views, but I think they cease to be
                    so particular about the principles of those from whom they get their
                    bonnets.
However that may be about trades, the demand is immediately met in all the
                    professions, and young men starting in life with a "connection" in the religious
                    world must belong to it if they wish to succeed. This is another anomaly. In
                    former times it involved stripes, persecution, poverty, and contumely to be a
                    "Christian," but a "dear Christian friend" of the present day need be afraid of
                    none of these things. He would never be called mad for making a profession of
                    the views of the early Christians; but he would if, with a good religious
                    opening in a professional point of view, he declined to take advantage of it.
                    Then look what society it gets you into—you become a sort of brother; and, I am
                    sorry to say, I know several young men who saw no chance of getting into the
                    fashionable world, and who took to the other as a good introduction. In fact
                    there was one standing in the doorway with me, the son of a solicitor I knew at
                    Dunderhead, who was in the office of his uncle, who was Lady Broadhem's
                    solicitor. Do you think either he or his uncle were sincere, or that he would
                    have ever had the slightest chance of paying attention to Lady Bridget, which he
                    positively had the presumption to do, if he had not enrolled himself in the band
                    of "dear Christian friends"? He is a very good hand at the doctrine of love when
                    the people to be loved are the aristocracy. He has just invited me on the part
                    of his uncle to a conversazione, at which will be exhibited a converted Aztec,
                    and at which that Christian solicitor, whose wife is a fat woman fanning herself
                    in the front row, will positively induce the great majority of those now here,
                    including a fair sprinkling of persons with titles, to be present.
Now far be it from me to imply that there are not earnest, sincere, and to some
                    extent self-sacrificing, professors of the Christian religion, who I know will
                    persist in mistaking me, and imagine that by writing this I bring the religion
                    itself into contempt. I say again that those who bring it into the most contempt
                    are those who profess it most, and that it is to counteract their prejudicial
                    influence upon society that I venture to incur their animosity.
I shall not report Joseph's speech at length, still less attempt to follow
                    Chundango in his unctuous remarks, in the course of which he lavished flattery
                    upon his audience to an extent even beyond what they could bear; they swallowed
                    it, however, with tea and ices, which were handed round, but I got so worked up
                    at last by a smooth-faced man who was describing what he had gone through for
                    the sake of the heathen, while he was living luxuriously in one of the most
                    charming little mission establishments which I have ever visited, that I made
                    the following remarks:—
"Ladies and Gentlemen,—When I came here this evening nothing was farther from my
                    purpose than to address you. I cannot allow, however, the remarks of the Bishop
                    of the Caribbee Islands, of Mr Chundango, or of the Rev. Mr Beevy, to pass
                    unnoticed.
"The Bishop of the Caribbee Islands, in the course of the very graphic account
                    which he has given you of the progress of conversion in his diocese, and of the
                    number of interesting and instructive deathbeds which he has witnessed, has
                    entered into a calculation by which it would appear that the average cost of the
                    conversion of a human soul in those islands is a little over —6. Ladies, you
                    pretend to believe that, but you don't. It would be impossible for you to sit
                    there with strings of lost human souls round your necks, and what would keep an
                    infant school in each ear, if you really believed that you could save a soul for
                    —6. You come here and listen to gentlemen who give you an account of the
                    sacrifices they make for the heathen, and of results which do not look so well
                    on the spot as on paper; and because you throw a pound into that vase in the
                    presence of the company, you think that you have done something for them too.
                    'They may give up all,' you say, 'but we can't afford to save more than two or
                    three souls per annum.'
"Ladies and gentlemen, as far as my experience goes, you neither of you as a rule
                    give up anything for the heathen. I cannot, therefore, share in your wonder at
                    the barren results of your missionary efforts. The Tabernacle Missionary
                    Society, for instance, offers to a young man of the lower middles" (Mr Beevy's
                    father was a butcher, so I did not like to enter more fully into this part of
                    the subject) "the opportunity of becoming a reverend and a gentleman, and thus
                    advancing a step in society. It gives him —300 a-year to begin with, —80 a-year
                    more with his wife, —20 a-year with his first child, and —10 a-year with each
                    succeeding olive-branch. It educates these free of expense at Holloway, and it
                    pays an indefinite number of passages between England and the 'mission-field,'
                    according as the health of the family requires it; and permit me to say that, if
                    to receive between —400 and —500 a-year in a tolerable climate, with a
                    comfortable house rent-free, and the prospect of a pension at the end, is to
                    give up all for the heathen, I have myself made the experiment without personal
                    discomfort. Perhaps I speak with a certain feeling of bitterness on this
                    subject, for I cannot forget that upon one occasion while residing among the
                    heathen, a gentleman who is now present, and who had sacrificed his all for
                    them, outbid me for a horse at an auction after I had run him up to sixty
                    guineas. With such a magnificent institution as this for supplying 'purse' and
                    'scrip,' and for 'taking thought for the morrow' in the way of pensions,
                    etc., tell me honestly whether you think you deserve real, not nominal
                    conversions? You have instituted a sort of 'civil service,' with which 'you
                    compass sea and land to make one proselyte.' You go to him with a number of
                    bibles, Armstrong guns, drunken sailors, and unscrupulous traders, a combination
                    which goes to make up what you call 'civilisation,' and you wonder that your
                    converts are actuated by the same motive which my own Hindoo servant once told
                    me induced him to leave his own religion, in which he could not venture to get
                    drunk, and become a Christian.
"Do you think it is the fault of the religion that you don't make converts, or
                    the fault of the system under which it is propagated? If you gave up 'the
                    enticing words of man's wisdom,' and tried a little of 'the demonstration of the
                    spirit and of power,' don't you think the result would be different? If you are
                    only illumined by 'a dim religious light' yourselves, how do you expect to
                    dissipate the gross darkness of paganism? You have only got an imitation blaze
                    that warms nobody at home, and you wonder when you take it abroad that it leaves
                    everybody as cold and as dead as it finds them.
"My dear Christian friends, in the face of the living contradiction which we all
                    present in our conduct to the religion we profess, our missionaries can only
                    convince the heathen of the truth of Christianity by living the life upon which
                    that religion is based, by means of which it can alone be powerful, and which is
                    only now not lived by Christians, because, as was prophesied, there is no 'faith
                    on the earth.' I have spoken to you faithfully, even harshly, but, believe me, I
                    have done so in a spirit of love. If you can take it in the same spirit, I shall
                    feel I have done you a great injustice."
I was so excited while delivering myself of these observations that I was quite
                    unconscious of the effect I was producing. I remember there was a deathlike
                    silence, and that when I sat down the gentlemen behind the table looked flushed
                    and agitated. Mr Beevy first rose to reply to observations which, he said,
                    reflected upon him personally, no less than upon the society to which he was
                    proud to say he belonged. He then explained the circumstances under which he had
                    been induced to give —65 for the horse; and retaliated upon me in language which
                    I will spare my readers now, as they will see it in the 'Discord,' when that
                    organ of the "worldly-holies" does me the honour to review this veracious
                    history. The religious world has a more choice catalogue of epithets for their
                    enemies than any other section of the community. I need not therefore suggest
                    "ribald" as appropriate to the present occasion. It was the term applied to me
                    by the amateur lay-preacher after Mr Beevy sat down. Finally, the proceedings
                    terminated in some confusion; before they did, however, I rose again to point
                    out how completely the conduct of those present had proved my case—either the
                    faults to which I alluded existed, and there was nothing more to be said; or I
                    had buffeted them without cause, and they had not "taken
                    it patiently," a course of conduct quite inexcusable in a meeting composed
                    exclusively of dear Christian friends. If there is a thing I yearn for, it is
                    the love of my fellow-men. By making the "worldly-holies" consider me an enemy,
                    I ought to secure an unusual share of their affection. Remember, now, if you
                    abuse me for this, it is unchristian; if you leave me alone, you will be
                    treating me "with the contempt I deserve," and that is unchristian too; the
                    right thing for you to do is to take the charitable view, to admit that my
                    motives may be good, even if the means employed are injudicious. When I am
                    abruptly asked in an omnibus, by an entire stranger, who may happen to belong to
                    the "straitest sect," the most solemn question which one man can put to another,
                    I do not resent it. I believe he is sincerely trying to "awaken me" with a "word
                    in season." I question the taste, but I respect the motive. Do the same to me,
                    dear friends. We are all bad, and I am far worse than any of you; but still I
                    may show how bad the best of us are. By living in a fool's paradise here, we
                    shall not qualify ourselves for the other one to come. Depend upon it, we are
                    all a great deal too comfortable to be safe.
"Lord Frank," said Lady Broadhem while Joseph was emptying the vase and pocketing
                    the contents, and the rest of the world was beginning to circulate, "had I known
                    that your object in coming here this evening was to insult my guests, I
                    certainly should not have asked you."
"You do me an injustice, Lady Broadhem," I said. "Nothing was further from my
                    purpose when I came here this evening than to have said anything. I supposed by
                    your sending me the card that you wanted to see me, and came; but my conscience
                    would not allow me to remain silent under the circumstances."
"Nothing can justify such conduct," said her ladyship, more angry than I had ever
                    seen her. "I cannot say how truly grateful I am that it is all at an end between
                    you and Ursula;" and Lady Broadhem shuddered at the idea of having exhibited
                    myself as I had done, if I had been her son-in-law.
"It was to show you what an escape you had made, and reconcile you to the
                    disappointment, that I expressed my sentiments so strongly," I said maliciously.
                    All my better nature seemed to leave me as I found myself involved in a fresh
                    encounter with this woman, who certainly possesses the art of raising my devil
                    beyond any one I ever met.
"I can't talk to you now," said Lady Broadhem, who did not wish to be too
                    manifestly discovered without her Christian spirit, though there was not much of
                    it left in anybody in the room. "I see Mr Beevy coming this way, and to avoid
                    any unpleasantness you had better not stay any longer just now. Come to-morrow
                    at twelve;" and she intercepted the missionary as he was advancing towards me
                    with a somewhat truculent air. All this time I had seen, but not had an
                    opportunity of exchanging a word with Ursula, who occupied an obscure corner,
                    and seemed anxious to attract as little notice as possible. I made my way to her
                    now. She looked careworn and nervous.
"I am afraid your remarks do not seem to have given satisfaction, Lord Frank,"
                    she said; "and if I may venture to say so, I think you might have said what you
                    did in language less calculated to give offence. I quite agreed with you in the
                    main, but do you think you will do good by thrusting truths home with little
                    ceremony?"
"I caught the habit from the class I was attacking, I suppose. They seldom
                    realise the harm they do by their disagreeable mode of inculcating precepts they
                    don't practise, and they never get preached to, though they listen to sermons
                    twice every Sunday."
"But don't you think you fairly lay yourself open to the charge of presumption in
                    thus taking to task men who have made theology their study, and in condemning a
                    whole set of people, who, if they occasionally are indiscreet, are most of them
                    sincere, and certainly do a great deal of good? Are you sure your own religious
                    opinions are sufficiently formed to warrant you in commenting so strongly on the
                    views of others?"
"I don't comment on their views, but on their conduct. While we are not to judge
                    others, we are also told that by their fruits we shall know them. It does not
                    require a profound knowledge of the dogmas of a creed to perceive the effect it
                    has upon those who profess it. Fortunately I have thought for myself, and have
                    come at last firmly to believe in the religion, but I should never have done so
                    had I continued to judge of it by its professors."
"Then you think the form in which Christianity is professed and practised
                    prejudices the cause of true religion?" said Lady Ursula.
"I have not a doubt of it. Our friends here 'bind heavy burdens and grievous to
                    be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders, but they themselves will not move
                    them with one of their fingers.' If you will substitute charitable bazaars for
                    races, oratorios for operas, conversaziones like this for balls, and otherwise
                    conform to the 'letter' which they have established, they accept you as a
                    brother, but there is very little difference in the 'spirit' which pervades the
                    so-called religious, and that which pervades the worldly excitements. The 'mint,
                    anise, and cummin' are there; but the 'judgment' is perverted, the 'mercy'
                    limited, and the 'faith' barren. However, we are getting into rather too
                    theological a discussion, and Broadhem looks as if he was anxious to interrupt
                    us."
"I think he is quite happy where he is," replied Lady Ursula. "You know Miss
                    Wylde, whom he got mamma to ask here to-night, don't you?"
"A little. By the way, did he go down to Ascot after all, and did he tell you the
                    especial motive he had in view?"
"Yes, I recommended him to go, as I think he is too much accustomed to walk in
                    the groove in which he has always found himself, and as I do not see much
                    difference, in a matter of that kind, between wanting to go and going. He came
                    back thoroughly dissatisfied, having failed to do more than exchange a few words
                    with Miss Wylde, by whom he seems quite infatuated. Can you tell me something
                    about her?"
I gave Ursula an account of Wild Harrie, based on Spiffy's information, not very
                    flattering, I am afraid, to that young lady, and wound up with something about
                    putting Broadhem on his guard.
"I don't quite agree with you there," she replied; "opposition will not improve
                    matters in his case, and you must forgive me for not taking the unfavourable
                    view of Miss Wylde's character that you have given me. I really think Broadhem
                    has, for the first time in his life, fallen in love, and the best way to take
                    care of him will be to know intimately the lady of his choice, so I shall
                    interrupt their tête-à-tête with the view of cultivating
                    Miss Wylde."
"But what will Lady Broadhem say to such an alliance? Miss Wylde has not got a
                    farthing."
"I don't think he need anticipate any opposition from mamma,—at all events not
                    just now," said Lady Ursula, with a sigh, and I knew there was a secret grief
                    which she could not tell hidden in her words. "I am so glad that Broadhem is
                    above the consideration of money, and has really allowed himself to be carried
                    away by his feelings, that I feel quite grateful to Miss Wylde, and inclined to
                    love her already."
"I think they are going to commence operations of some sort again," I said, as I
                    saw the enemies I love, but who don't return the affection, ranging themselves
                    behind the table; "part two is about to begin, so I shall make my escape.
                    Perhaps I shall see you to-morrow; I am coming to call on Lady Broadhem," and I
                    left Lady Ursula, and had to squeeze past Broadhem and Wild Harrie. "You seem
                    interested," I said to the latter, "as you are going to stay."
"I suppose you don't intend to show any more sport, Lord Frank, as you are going,
                    so the best of the fun is over. I was just telling Lord Broadhem how I enjoyed
                    that brilliant burst of yours; it was worth anything to watch the expressions on
                    the countenances of all our friends here who have 'given up the world,' and who
                    thought they were having it all their own way till you got up. I want Lord
                    Broadhem to follow your lead, but it seems he considers himself 'a dear
                    Christian friend.' We must break him of that, mustn't we? It is a very bad
                    'form.' I suppose you don't know what that expression means," Wild Harrie went
                    on, her eyes dancing with mischief as she turned to Broadhem.
The struggles which that young gentleman's conscience was having with his
                    affections were manifestly portrayed on his countenance, and Wild Harrie
                    evidently was amusing herself by shocking his feelings. I must do her the
                    justice to say that I don't think she could play the hypocrite if she tried; and
                    I began to hope, as I looked at her frank reckless face, that her sins were more
                    on the surface than in the heart. "I suppose you mean a form of worship," said
                    Broadhem; "I wish you would not talk in this way. Whenever I try to have a
                    little serious conversation with you, you turn it off with a joke. I must say,"
                    he added, sententiously, "that the style of young ladies' conversation in the
                    present day is open to great improvement."
"I tell you what, Lord Broadhem," she retorted, "we will put each other through a
                    course of training; you shall improve my conversation and 'style of going'
                    generally, while I try to bring you into a little harder condition than you are
                    at present. You have no idea of his innocence, Lord Frank, considering that he
                    is a rising statesman upon whom the hopes of the Liberal party are fixed. I
                    asked him just now, apropos of the speech he threatens us with, 'if he felt
                    fit,' and he blushed to that degree that I felt quite shy. There was no harm in
                    my saying that, was there?"
"None that I know of," said I; "but we are attracting general attention by
                    talking so loud. Good-bye, Miss Wylde. I am afraid I must disturb you, Broadhem;
                    your sister can't hear where she is, and wants your place;" and I walked off the
                    young gentleman, to Wild Harrie's disgust, and saw with satisfaction that Lady
                    Ursula took his vacated seat.
"What a curious thing it is," said Broadhem, "that I should find in Miss Wylde
                    something which is to me so attractive! I daresay you think it odd my taking you
                    so much into my confidence; but, except Ursula, I have no one to whom I can
                    speak openly, and it is such a relief sometimes."
"On these occasions specially," said I.
"Do you know, I think that if I had her all to myself I could cure her faults,
                    for I am quite alive to them. Don't you think there is something very fresh and
                    natural about her?"
"Fresh, certainly, in what she would call the 'skittish' sense. As for the
                    natural part of it, I should require to know her better before giving my
                    opinion."
"You know," he went on, "she is the last person in the world with whom I imagined
                    it possible I could have been in love: she says the most dreadful things
                    sometimes—and I am afraid they amuse me more than they should; there is no doubt
                    about her being immensely clever, but she is quite taken up with the world as
                    yet."
"Not more than you are, my dear Broadhem; come and walk home with me: you will be
                    back in time to put the Wyldes into their carriage, and I want to speak to you."
                    I led him unresistingly to his coat and hat in the hall, and braved the stern
                    gaze of a butler who apparently dressed after Mr Beevy, and who, when I arrived,
                    had smiled blandly upon me as being 'one of us,' for all the servants in Lady
                    Broadhem's establishment were guaranteed converted. "No servants, whose
                    principles are not strictly Evangelical, and who are unable to produce
                    unexceptionable testimony as to their personal piety, need apply"—that was the
                    form of the advertisement, and the consequence was, that every menial in the
                    house had brought a certificate of his or her entire change of heart from their
                    last place. Lady Broadhem was also very particular about the theological views
                    of the family they had just left.
The butler frowned severely upon me now, for he had been standing in the doorway
                    with the cura—oa when I was addressing the meeting, no doubt sympathising keenly
                    with Mr Beevy (I found out afterwards that Lady Broadhem was educating his son
                    for the "work"), and said to Broadhem, "Does her ladyship know you are going
                    away, my lord?"
"No," said Broadhem, with some hesitation; "I don't think she does. I am coming
                    back again soon."
"I think, my lord, I shall have to let her ladyship know—perhaps your lordship
                    will wait. James, mind the door." This meant that James was not to open it.
"Stop, my friend," I said; "your conscience tells you that you should not be a
                    party to this irregularity on the part of his lordship,—is not that so?" I
                    asked.
"Yes, my lord," said the butler, rigidly.
"I will accompany you to Lady Broadhem, then, to explain the circumstances. Be
                    good enough to follow me," and I led the way up-stairs.
Now it so happens that I have a remarkable faculty of remembering faces, and I
                    had been conscious for some weeks past of being familiar with the particularly
                    ill-favoured countenance of Lady Broadhem's butler; but it was not until now
                    that the circumstances under which I had first seen it flashed upon me. Not many
                    years have elapsed since I achieved considerable renown in Australia as an
                    amateur hunter of bushrangers. The sport exhilarated me, combining, as it did,
                    an exciting physical with a wholesome moral exercise. I now remembered
                    distinctly having caught Lady Broadhem's butler with a lasso. Indeed I had good
                    reason not to forget it, for a shot he fired at me at the moment killed my
                    favourite horse. That he should have failed to recognise in Lord Frank Vanecourt
                    the notorious Mr Francis who had been the means of capturing not only himself,
                    but a good many of his fraternity, was not wonderful. The discovery tickled me,
                    and restored my good temper, which had been slightly ruffled.
"What a delightful change you must find it to be in the society of all these good
                    people after having passed so many years in the bush!" I said, and my tone of
                    anger suddenly became one of easy familiarity, as I turned sharply upon him,
                    and, leaning against the banisters, benevolently scanned his distorted
                    physiognomy. The play of his facial muscles, and changes of hue, interested me,
                    so I continued—"But I will venture to say that you have never since paid such
                    attention to any sermon as you did to mine that Sunday morning when I had you
                    and your seven friends strapped to eight trees in a semicircle, and concluded my
                    remarks, you may remember, with a few strokes of 'practical application.' I
                    should like to hear the story of your escape from prison."
"Oh, my lord," he groaned, and his teeth chattered and his knees trembled, "I'm a
                    reformed character—I am indeed. Perhaps if your lordship would kindly please to
                    walk this way," and he opened a side door off the landing. "Knowing your
                    lordship's generosity, and your lordship's interest in the family, and my own
                    unworthiness, your lordship wouldn't be too hard upon a poor man whose
                    repentance is genuine, and I could tell your lordship something of the very
                    highest importance to her ladyship, and to Lady Ursula, and to your lordship,
                    and to the whole family."
I knew the man to be a clever scoundrel, and saw that he evidently had some
                    information which might prove of value. A mystery did exist—of that I had had
                    abundant evidence. Was I justified in refusing to find the key?—besides, if this
                    man really possessed some secret, could it be in more dangerous hands? This last
                    consideration decided me, and I followed the returned convict to a little
                    sanctum of his own, which opened off the pantry, from which I emerged five
                    minutes later a wiser if not a better man.
"What a time you have been!" said Broadhem. "I suppose you have been arguing the
                    point with my mother?"
"No, I left that to Drippings here." I did not know his name, but my spirits were
                    high, and I gave him the first my imagination suggested. "You have no idea what
                    a treasure your mother has got in this man. I assure you there is no knowing
                    what you may not owe to the influence for good of one devoted Christian servant
                    of this kind—the proof of it is, as you see, that Lady Broadhem is perfectly
                    willing that you should do what you like for the rest of the evening.
                    Good-night, Drippings," and I passed the bewildered James, who evidently thought
                    that both I and the terrified-looking butler had gone suddenly mad.
"Broadhem," said I, "I have hit upon an entirely new and original idea. I am
                    thinking of trying it myself, and I want you to try it too."
"Well," said Broadhem, "I am never surprised at anything you say or do; what is
                    it?"
"It has been suggested to me by what I have seen at your mother's this
                    evening—and you may depend upon it there is a great deal to be said in its
                    favour; it is an odd thing it has not occurred to anybody before, but that
                    leaves all the better opening for you and me."
"Go on," said Broadhem, whose curiosity was getting excited.
"Don't be in a hurry; it is possible you may not like the idea when you hear it,
                    and under no circumstances must you tell it to anybody."
"All right," said Broadhem, "but I hope it has nothing to do with companies—I
                    hate dabbling in companies. I believe one does more harm to one's name by making
                    it common than one gets good through the money one pockets."
"Well, there is more truth than elegance of expression in that remark: it needs
                    not have to do with companies unless you like."
"Now, if it has anything to do with politics, I am your man."
"You would make a great coup in politics with it; it is
                    especially adapted for politics, and has never been tried."
"You don't say so," said Broadhem, delighted; "don't go on making one guess as if
                    it was a game. Has it anything to do with the suffrage?"
"It has to do with everything," I said; "I don't think I can do it myself; I made
                    a lamentable failure just now by way of a start," and I paused suddenly—"Who am
                    I," I thought, "that I should venture to preach? What act have I done in life
                    which should give weight to my words?" but the fervour was on me, and I could no
                    more check the burning thoughts than the trumpet can control the sound it
                    emits.
"Well," he said impatiently.
"LIVE THE LIFE."
"I don't understand you," said Broadhem.
"If you did," I said, "do you suppose I should feel my whole nature yearning as
                    it is? What better proof could I desire that the life has yet to be lived than
                    that you don't understand me? Supposing, now, that you and I actually put into
                    practice what all these friends of your mother profess, and, instead of judging
                    people who go to plays, or play croquet on Sunday, or dance, we tried to live
                    the inner life ourselves. Supposing, in your case, that
                    your own interest never entered your head in any one thing you undertook;
                    supposing you actually felt that you had nothing in common with the people
                    around you, and belonged neither to the world of publicans and sinners, nor to
                    the world of scribes and Pharisees, but were working on a different plane, in
                    which self was altogether ignored—that you gave up attempting to steer your own
                    craft any longer, but put the helm into other hands, and could complacently
                    watch her drive straight on to the breakers, and make a deliberate shipwreck of
                    every ambition in life,—don't you think you would create rather a sensation in
                    the political world? Supposing you could arrive at the point of being as
                    indifferent to the approval as to the censure of your fellow-men, of caring as
                    little for the highest honours which are in their power to bestow now, as for
                    the fame which posterity might award to you hereafter; supposing that wealth and
                    power appeared equally contemptible to you for their own sakes, and that you had
                    no desire connected with this earth except to be used while upon it for divine
                    ends, and that all the while that this motive was actuating you, you were
                    striving and working and toiling in the midst of this busy world, doing exactly
                    what every man round you was doing, but doing it all from a different motive,—it
                    would be curious to see where you would land—how you would be abused and
                    misunderstood, and what a perplexity you would create in the minds of your
                    friends, who would never know whether you were a profound intriguer or a shallow
                    fool. How much you would have to suffer, but what a balance there would be to
                    the credit side! For instance, as you could never be disappointed, you would be
                    the only free man among slaves. There is not a man or woman of the present day
                    who is not in chains, either to the religious world or the other, or to family
                    or friends, and always to self. Now, if we could get rid of the bonds of self
                    first, we could snap the other fetters like packthread. What a grand sensation
                    it would be to expand one's chest and take in a full, free, pure breath, and
                    uplift the hands heavenward that have been pinioned to our sides, and feel the
                    feeble knees strong and capable of enabling us to climb upwards! With the sense
                    of perfect liberty we should lose the sense of fear, no man could make us
                    ashamed, and the waves of public opinion would dash themselves in vain against
                    the rock upon which we should then be established. The nations of the earth are
                    beating the air for freedom, and inventing breech-loaders wherewith to conquer
                    it, and they know not that the battlefield is self, and the weapons for the
                    fight not of fleshly make. Have you ever been in an asylum for idiots,
                    Broadhem?" I asked, abruptly.
"No," he said, timidly.
"Then you are in one now. Look at them; there is the group to which you belong
                    playing at politics. Look at the imbecile smile of gratified vanity with which
                    they receive the applause that follows a successful hit. That poor little boy
                    has just knocked a political tobacco-pipe out of Aunt Sally's mouth, and he
                    imagines himself covered with a lasting glory. There is another going to try a
                    jump: he makes a tremendous effort before he gets to the stick, but balks, and
                    carries it off in his hand with a grin of triumph. Look, there is a man with a
                    crotchet; he keeps on perpetually scratching his left ear and his right palm
                    alternately, and then touching the ground with the tips of his fingers. He never
                    varies the process. Look at the gluttons who would do nothing but eat if they
                    were allowed, like men who have just got into office, and see how spiteful they
                    are, and what faces they make at each other, and how terribly afraid they are of
                    their masters, and how they cringe for their favour, and how naughty they are
                    when their backs are turned. Look, again, at these groups drawing, and
                    carpentering, and gardening, imagining that they are producing results that are
                    permanently to benefit mankind; but they are drawing with sticks, and
                    carpentering with sham tools, and planting stones. And see, there is a
                    fire-balloon going up; how delighted they all are, and how they clap their hands
                    as the gaudy piece of tissue-paper inflated with foul gas sails over their
                    heads. Is there one of the noisy crowd that knows what its end will be or that
                    thinks of to-morrow? Is there one of them, I wonder, that suspects he is an
                    idiot? If you find out, Broadhem, that you are not one of them, they will call
                    you an idiot—be prepared for that. The life of a sound and sane man in such
                    company cannot be pleasant. Every act of it must be an enigma to those around
                    him. If he is afraid of them, they will turn and rend him; if he is fearless,
                    they will hate him, because 'he testifies of the evil.' His life will be a
                    martyrdom, but his spirit will be free, his senses new-born; and think you he
                    would exchange the trials and labours which his sanity must entail upon him for
                    the drivelling pleasures which he has lost? Tell me, Broadhem, what you think of
                    my idea?"
"It is not altogether new to me, though I did not exactly understand what you
                    meant at first," said Broadhem, who spoke with more feeling than I gave him
                    credit for possessing. "I have never heard it put in such strong language
                    before, but I have seen Ursula practise it, and I was wondering all the time you
                    were talking whether you did."
"I never have yet," I said. "I began by telling you that the idea only occurred
                    to me lately in its new form. I had often thought of it as a speculation. I
                    began by assuming that purely disinterested honesty might pay, because an
                    original idea well applied generally succeeds; but when I came to work the thing
                    out, I found that there was a practical difficulty in the way, and that you
                    could not be unselfish from a selfish motive a bit more than you could look like
                    a sane man while you were really still an idiot. And so the fact is, I have
                    talked the notion out to you as it has been suggested to me, though Drippings
                    nearly drove it out of my head. I think the reason I felt impelled to do so was,
                    that had it not been for your sister I should never have thought upon such
                    subjects as I do now. I know her love for you, and the value of her influence
                    over you. Even now she is devoting herself to guarding your interests in the
                    most important step of a man's life, and I seem instinctively to feel how I can
                    best please her. Don't you think she agrees in what I have said to-night, and
                    would approve of the conversation we have had?"
"Yes," said Broadhem. "Do you know you are quite a different sort of fellow from
                    what I imagined. I always thought that you did not believe in anything."
"That was because I lived exactly like my neighbours, without adding to my daily
                    life the sin of professing belief in a religion to which it was diametrically
                    opposed. Most of the sceptics of the present day are driven to their opinions by
                    their consciences, which revolt against the current hypocrisy and glaring
                    inconsistencies that characterise the profession of the popular theology. As a
                    class I have found them honester, and in every way better men than modern
                    Christians."
"Do you know why?"
"No," said Broadhem.
"Because modern Christians don't really believe much more than sceptics—a man's
                    life is the result of his internal, not his external belief. There can be no
                    life separate from internal belief, and the lives of men are imperfect because
                    their belief is external. The right thing believed the right way must inevitably
                    produce the perfect life. Either, then, the civilised world believes the wrong
                    thing, or it believes the right thing the wrong way. In other words, faith and
                    charity are inseparable, and when one is perfect the other is too. That is what
                    I mean by 'living the life.'"
"According to that, you would make out that nobody rightly believes the Christian
                    religion who is not perfect; that, you know, is ridiculous," said Broadhem.
"That is, nevertheless, exactly what I do mean. To know the doctrine, it is
                    necessary to do the will. Christians of the present day adopt certain
                    theological dogmas intellectually and call them their religious belief. This has
                    a superficial and varying influence upon their lives, for it consists merely of
                    opinions which are liable to change. The only kind of faith which is inseparable
                    from life is a divine conviction of truth imparted to the intellect through the
                    heart, and which becomes as absolute to the internal conscience as one's
                    existence, and as impossible of proof. It may be added to, but what has once
                    been thus accepted can never be changed. Such a faith cannot be selfish, for it
                    has been derived from the affections, hence the life must be charitable. But the
                    modern Christian belief, received by an effort of pure reason directly through
                    the intellect, is not a divine intuition, which, if embodied, would result in a
                    perfect life and a united Church, but a theological problem which professors of
                    religion, unlike professors of mathematics, are at liberty to solve for their
                    own benefit, according to their own taste, and to quarrel about incessantly,
                    thereby giving occasion to the thoughtless to scoff, and to the thoughtful to
                    reject all revelation as 'foolishness'—since it is incapable of demonstration by
                    the Baconian method,—the only one known to these 'wise and prudent'
                    philosophers, but one by which, fortunately for them, 'babes' are not expected
                    to prove their relationship before believing in their mothers."
"Then," said Broadhem, "you actually mean to say that the whole of Christendom is
                    wanting in this faith?"
"I fear that almost universally they mistake a bare belief for faith. Their
                    theology thus becomes an act of memory instead of a rule
                    of life, and Christianity is reduced to a superstition. The only way of
                    distinguishing superstition from true religion is by an examination of results.
                    But where are the fruits of modern Christianity? If it be absolutely true, and
                    all-sufficient for purposes of regeneration, how am I to account for the
                    singular fact that there is as much wickedness in London in the year 1865 A.D., as there was in Jerusalem in the year 1 B.C.? If the object of the last revelation was to take the
                    place of the one before it, and to reform the world, why are the best modern
                    Christians of my acquaintance no holier than the best modern Jews whom I have
                    the honour to know?"
"But the object of the last revelation was not to reform the world, but to save
                    it," he replied.
"Thanks, Broadhem, for having put in rather too epigrammatic a form, perhaps, to
                    please those who believe it, the most diabolical sophism that was ever invented
                    to beguile a Church—the doctrine that men can be saved by opinion without
                    practice: that a man's practice may be bad, and yet because his faith is good
                    his salvation is sure—that he can, by such a miserable philosophy as would
                    disgrace the justice of the earth, escape the just sentence to be passed upon
                    all his deeds. The results of so fatal a dogma must be a Church that tends to
                    atheism, and that loves corruption. There is in every heart a something that
                    speaks against this, and speaks with a burning language that sweeps the
                    invisible chords of the inmost consciousness, and awakens a torrent of indignant
                    denial of the shallow sophistry that a man can be saved if his thoughts and life
                    are bad. If he cherish self-love, and the love of ruling others, though he
                    intrench the intellect in the midst of all creeds, and span the reason with all
                    faiths, making a sacred public profession before all men, he but adds to the
                    heinousness of his crime, and makes more terrible the fast-coming and final
                    judgment."
Broadhem stopped suddenly in the street as I finished in a somewhat excited tone,
                    and gasped rather than spoke, "Frank, you literally astound me. I could never
                    have believed it possible you would have come out in that line. Are those your
                    own ideas or another's?"
"Another's," I replied, coolly. "I believe they are rather unsound, but I commend
                    them to your notice, because, if they are not correct, Christianity will soon
                    cease to exist, even in name; but if they are, then it contains within it a
                    regenerating power hitherto undeveloped, whereby the world may be absolutely
                    reformed. I will venture to assert that Christian nations will make no moral
                    progress so long as they continue to cherish the pagan superstition that
                    religion consists in trying to save themselves by virtue of a creed, instead of
                    in trying to save others by the virtues of a life."
"But that's works," said Broadhem.
"Yes," I repeated, "that's works, but of a kind only possible when accompanied by
                    intuitive living faith, which I have just endeavoured to describe. There is a
                    promise that 'greater works than these shall they do' who 'believe.' Why, I want
                    to know, have these 'works,' greater than any that were then accomplished, and
                    which would reform the world, never been attempted? Because people don't believe
                    in the tremendous power of disinterestedness, and they can't face the severe
                    training which the perfection of self-sacrifice involves. So one set of
                    'worldly-holies' regard all personal discipline as a tempting snare to be
                    avoided, and entertain a great horror of what they conceitedly term 'their own
                    merits.' This very superfluous sentiment, combined with a selfish belief in
                    certain doctrinals (of which they usually do make a merit), is enough, they
                    imagine—the 'works' will follow; and so they do, and take the form we have just
                    seen in your mother's drawing-room. Another set delight in a mild —sthetic sort
                    of training, to be performed in a particular costume, according to the obsolete
                    ceremonial rules of a Church 'which is divided against itself,' and their works
                    take the fatuous form of ecclesiastical high art. Others, again, go to a still
                    further extreme, and consider discipline not the means but the end. Hence they
                    go through their drill in seclusion, exclusively for their own benefit, and
                    their works take the form of scourgings and horse-hair shirts, and other
                    mortifications of the flesh, which do no good to themselves nor to anybody else.
                    And then, in strong contrast, are those who train enough in all conscience with
                    'gloves,' single-stick, sculls, and all suchlike appliances, and whose works
                    take the form of tubbing, volunteering, and a general jovial philanthropy. I am
                    not sure that they are not the most hopeful set after all; they believe in
                    severe muscular training as necessary to produce great physical results. Get
                    them to accept, the possibility of the world's regeneration by a
                    divinely-directed effort of heroic spiritual discipline on the part of its
                    inhabitants, and you might convert them from 'physical' into 'moral force'
                    Christians. They understand the efficacy of 'a long pull, and a strong pull, and
                    a pull all together;' and they might be shown that the real place for a 'biceps'
                    is the will, not the arms; and instead of a body 'as hard as nails,' the chief
                    aim of one's life should be to bring one's spirit to that condition—'hard,' be
                    it understood, in the sense of being impervious to the influences which weaken
                    and demoralise it—hard in its resistance to the tyranny of society, to the
                    claims of family or friends, and to the force of 'natural' ties, where any of
                    these things interfere with the 'spiritual' training. It is only by thus
                    remaining in the world, and yet refusing to concede a jot to it upon any
                    pretence, however plausible, that it is possible to acquire the internal
                    isolation and strength of will necessary to the achievement of 'these greater
                    works.' Depend upon it, the task of performing them is not hopeless because it
                    seems stupendous. There are spiritual forces now latent in humanity powerful
                    enough to restore a fallen universe; but they want to be called into action by
                    fire. They are in a cold fluid state, and must be turned into stone. Sublime
                    moment! when, conscious of the Titanic agency within them, and burning with
                    desire to give it expression, men first unite to embody, and then with
                    irresistible potency to impart to others that 'Life' which is 'the Light of
                    men.'"
As I was thus speaking, we turned into Piccadilly, and an arm was passed through
                    mine.
"Why is it," asked Broadhem, "that men are not yet at all conscious of possessing
                    this spiritual agency?"
"Why is it, ask you?"—and the clear solemn voice of my new companion startled
                    Broadhem, who had not seen him join me, so that I felt his arm tremble upon
                    mine. "Ask rather why sects are fierce and intolerant; why worship is formal and
                    irreverent; why zealots run to fierce frenzies and react to atheistic chills;
                    why piety is constrained and lifeless, like antique pictures painted by the old
                    Byzantines upon a golden ground; why Puseyism tries to whip piety to life with
                    scourges, and starve out sin with fasts; why the altar is made a stage where
                    Ritualists delight a gaping crowd, and the pulpit a place where the sleek
                    official drones away the sleepy hour; why religious books are the dullest; why
                    the clergyman is looked upon by the millions as a barrel-organ, whom the sect
                    turns like the wandering Savoyard, unable to evolve a free-born note. There is
                    but one answer——" and he stopped abruptly.
"What is it?" I said, timidly, for I was overwhelmed by the torrent of his
                    eloquence.
"We have lost our God! That is why men are unconscious of His force within them.
                    It is a terrible thing for a nation to lose its God. History shows that all
                    nations wherein the religious inspiration has gone down beneath formalism,
                    infidelity, a warlike spirit, an enslaving spirit, or a trading spirit, have
                    burst like so many gilded bubbles, most enlarged and gorgeous at the moment of
                    their close. Think of the old Scripture, 'The wicked shall be turned into hell,
                    and all the nations that forget God.'"
"Who is that?" whispered Broadhem. "I never saw him before."
"I want to be alone with him," I replied. "Good night, Broadhem. You had better
                    go back now, or you will find your friends gone. Think over what I have said.
                    Once realise the 'mystery of godliness,' and the
                    martyrdom which it must entail will lose its terrors."
"Let him sacrifice us if He will," said he who had before spoken. "The true man
                    is but a cannon-shot, rejoicing most of all when the Divine Artillerist shall
                    send him irresistible and flaming against some foeman of the race risen from
                    Pandemonium. Man—the true man—is like the Parthian's arrow, kindling into fiery
                    flames as it leaves the bow. Man—the true man—is the Spirit-sword, but the
                    sword-arm is moved by the heart of the Almighty."
Ah Piccadilly! hallowed recollections may attach to those stones worn by the feet
                    of the busy idiots in this vast asylum, for one sane man has trodden them, and I
                    listened to the words of wisdom as they dropped from the lips of one so obscure
                    that his name is still unknown in the land, but I doubted not who at that moment
                    was the greatest man in Piccadilly.

</div></body></text></TEI>