
CHAPTER VI
Anastasya and he were dining that night in Montmartre as usual. His piece of news hovered
      over their conversation like a bird hesitating as to the right spot at which to establish its
      nest.
“I saw Bertha to-day,” he said, forcing the opening at last.
“You still see her then.”
“Yes. I married her this afternoon.”
“You what ? What do you mean ?”
. “What I say, my dear. I married her.”
“You mean you—’” She put an imaginary ring
on her finger.
“Yes. I married her at the Mairie.”
Anastasya looked blankly into him, as though he contained cheerless stretches where no
      living thing could grow.
“You mean to say you’ve done that'”
“Yes; I have.” '
“Why ?”
Tarr stopped a moment.
“Well, the alleged reason was that she is enceinte.” “But — whose is the child ?”

“Kreisler’s, she says.”
The statement, she saw, was genuine. He was telling her what he had been doing. They
      both immediately retired into themselves, she to distance and stow away their former dialogue
      and consider the meaning of this new fact; he to wait, his hand near his mouth holding a pipe,
      until she should have collected herself. But he began speaking first:
“Things are exactly the same as before. I was bound to do that. I had allowed her to
      consider herself engaged a year ago, and had to keep to that. I have merely gone back a year
      into the past and fulfilled a pledge, and now return to you. All is in perfect order.”
“All is not in perfect order. It is Kreisler’s child to begin with, you
      say——”
“Yes, but it would be very mean to use that fact to justify one in escaping from an
      obligation.”
“That is sentimentality.”
“Sentimentality ! Sentimentality ! Cannot we, you and I, afford to give Bertha
       that Sentimentality ! What an absurd word that is with its fierce use in our poor
      modern hands! What does it mean ? Has life become such an affair of economic calculation that
      men are too timid to allow themselves any complicated pleasures? Where there is abundance you
      can afford waste. Sentimentality is a cry on a level with the Simple Life! The ideal of
      perfect success is an ideal belonging to the same sort of individual as the inventor of Equal
      Rights of Man and Perfectibility. Sentimentality is a privilege. It is a luxury that
      the crowd does not feel itself equal to, once it begins to think about it. Besides, it is
      different in different hands.”
“That may be true as regards sentimentality in general. But in this case you have been
      guilty of a popular softness——”
“No. Listen. I will explain something to you. You said a moment ago that it was
       Kreisler’s child. Well, that is my security! That enables me to commit this
      folly, without too great danger. It is an 
        earnest of the altruistic origin of the action not being forgotten!”
“But that — to return to your words — is surely a very mean calculation ?”
“Therefore it takes the softness out of the generous action it is allied to——”
“No. It takes its raison d’etre away altogether. It leaves it merely a stupid and
      unnecessary fact. It cancels the generosity, but leaves the fact — your marriage.”
“But the fact itself is altered by that!”
“In what way ? You are now married to Bertha——”
“Yes, but what does that mean ? I married Bertha this afternoon, and here I am punctually
      and as usual with you this evening——”
“But the fact of your having married Bertha this afternoon will prevent your making any one
      else your wife in the future. Supposing I had a child by you —  not by Kreisler — it
      would be impossible to legitimatize him. The thing is of no importance in itself. But you have
      given Kreisler’s child what you should have kept for your own ! What’s the good of giving
      your sex over into the hands of a swanky expert, as you describe it, if you continue to act on
      your own initiative ? I throw up my job. Garçon, l'addition !”
But a move to the café opposite satisfied her as a demonstration. Tarr was sure of her, and
      remained passive. She extorted a promise from him: to conduct no more obscure diplomacies in
      the future.
Bertha and Tarr took a flat in the Boulevard Port Royal, not far from the Jardin des
      Plantes. They gave a party to which Fraulein Lipmann and a good many other people came. He
      maintained the rule of four to seven, roughly, for Bertha, with the utmost punctiliousness.
      Anastasya and Bertha did not meet.
Bertha’s child came, and absorbed her energies for upwards of a year. It bore some
      resemblance to Tarr. Tarr’s afternoon visits became less frequent.

He lived now publicly with his illicit and splendid bride.
Two years after the birth of the child, Bertha divorced Tarr. She then married an
      eye-doctor, and lived with a brooding severity in his company and that of her only child.
Tarr and Anastasya did not marry. They had no children. Tarr, however, had three children by
      a lady of the name of Rose Fawcett, who consoled him eventually for the splendours of his 
      “perfect woman.” But yet beyond the dim though solid figure of Rose Fawcett, another rises.
      This one represents the swing-back of the pendulum once more to the swagger side. The
      cheerless and stodgy absurdity of Rose Fawcett required the painted, fine and inquiring
      face of Prism Dirkes.
 THE END
