<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Ginx's Baby, by Edward Jenkins</title><author>Jenkins, John Edward (1838-1910).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1870</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
VIII.—“See how these Christians love one another.”
A mass-meeting of Protestants had been summoned for three o'clock on the day designated
            in the letter of the Papist attorneys, to be held in the Philopragmon Hall. That was the
            favorite centre of countless movements, both well-meant and well-executed, and of others
            as futile as they were foolish. Yet one could not say that a larger proportion of the
            latter were connected with the Hall than existed in as many other human enterprises of
            any sort. The concession of the Romanists at first dashed the managers of the
            demonstration. Their grievance was gone. Still there remained topics for a meeting: they
            would rejoice over victory, and consult about the future of the Protestant Baby.
The Secretary was an old hand at these meetings. He planned to import into this one a
            sensation. Ginx's Baby, brought from the convent, stripped of his papal swathings and
            enveloped in a handsome outfit presented by an amiable Protestant Duchess, was placed in
            a cradle with his head resting on a Bible. I am afraid he was quite as uncomfortable as
            he had ever been at the convent. When, at the conclusion of the chairman's speech, in
            which he informed the audience of their triumph, this exhibition was deftly introduced
            upon the platform, the huzzas, and clappings, and waving of handkerchiefs were such as
            even that place had never seen. The child was astounded into quietness.
Mr. Trumpeter took the chair—believed by many to be, next to the Queen, the most
            powerful defender of the faith in the three kingdoms. I never could understand why the
            newspapers reported his speeches—I cannot.
When he had done, Lord Evergood, “a popular, practical peer, of sound Protestant
            principles,” as the Daily Banner alliteratively termed him next morning, rose to move
            the first resolution, already cut and dried by the committee—
“That the infant so happily rescued from the incubus of a delusive superstition, should
            be remitted to the care of the Church Widows' and Orphans' Augmentation Society, and
            should be supported by voluntary contributions.”
Before Lord Evergood could say a word murmurs arose in every part of the hall. He was a
            mild, gentlemanly Christian, without guile, and the opposition both surprised and
            frightened him. He uttered a few sentences in approval of his proposition and sat
            down.
An individual in the gallery shouted—“Sir! I rise to move an amendment!”
Cheers, and cries of “Order! order! Sit down!” etc.
The Chairman, with great blandness, said: “The gentleman is out of order; the
            resolution has not yet been seconded. I call upon the Rev. Mr. Valpy to second the
            resolution.”
Mr. Valpy, incumbent of St. Swithin's-within, insisted on speaking, but what he said
            was known only to himself. When he had finished there was an extraordinary commotion. On
            the platform many ministers and laymen jumped to their feet; in the hall at least a
            hundred aspirants for a hearing raised themselves on benches or the convenient backs of
            friends.
The Chairman shouted, “Order! ORDER, gentlemen! This is a great occasion; let us show
            unanimity!”
There seemed to be an unanimous desire to speak. Amid cheers, cries for order, and
            Kentish fire, you could hear the Rev. Mark Slowboy, Independent, the Rev. Hugh Quickly,
            Wesleyan, the Rev. Bereciah Calvin, Presbyterian, the Rev. Ezekiel Cutwater, Baptist,
            calling to the chair.
A lull ensued, of which advantage was taken by Mr. Stentor, a well-known Hyde Park
            orator, who bellowed from a friend's shoulders in the pit, “Mr. Chairman, hear ME!” an
            appeal that was followed by roars of laughter.
What was the matter? Why the proposal to hand over the baby to an Anglican refuge
            stirred up the blood of every Dissenter present. It was lifting the infant out of the
            frying-pan and dexterously dropping him into the fire. But the chairman was accustomed
            to these scenes. He stayed the tumult by proposing that a representative from each
            denomination should give his opinion to the audience. “Whom would they have first?”
The loudest cries were for Mr. Cutwater, who stood forth—a weak, stooping,
            half-halting, little man, with a limp necktie, and trousers puffy at the knees—but with
            honest use of them, let me say. It is quite credible that if Dr. Watts's assertion be
            true that—
 “Satan trembles when he sees The weakest saint upon his knees,” 
that arch-enemy was unusually perturbed when Ezekiel Cutwater was upon his. On these he
            had borne manly contests with evil. Two things—yea, three—were rigid in Ezekiel's creed;
            fire would never have burned them out of him: hatred of Popery, contempt of Anglican
            priestcraft and apostolic succession, and adhesion to the dogma of adult baptism and
            total immersion. Whoso should not join with him in these let him be Anathema
            Maranatha.
His eye kindled as he looked at the seething audience. “Sir,” said he, “I beg to move
            an amendment to the motion of the noble lord. (Cheers.) That motion proposes to transfer
            to the care of the Established Church this tender and unconscious infant (bending over
            Ginx's baby), just snatched from the toils of a kindred superstition. (Oh, oh, hisses
            and cheers.) I withdraw the expression; I did not mean to be offensive. (Hear.) This is
            a grand representative meeting—not of the English Church, not of the Baptist Church, not
            of the Wesleyan Church—but of Protestantism. (Cheers and Kentish fire.) In such an
            assembly is it right to propose any singular disposition of a representative infant?
            This is now the adopted child, not of one, but of all denominations. (Cheers.) Around
            his, or her—I am not sure which—cherubic head circle the white-winged angels of various
            Churches, and on her or him, whichever it may be——”
The Chairman said that he might as well say that he had authentic information that it
            was HIM.
“Him then—concentrate the sympathies of every Protestant heart. Let us not despoil the
            occasion of its greatness by exhibiting a narrow bigotry in one direction! Let us bring
            into this infantile focus the rays of Catholic unity. (Loud cheering and Kentish fire.)
            To me, for one, it would be eminently painful to think—what doubtless would occur if the
            motion is adopted—that within a week of his entrance into the asylum of the society
            named in it, this diminutive and unknowing sinner should go through the farce of a
            supposititious admission into the Church of Christ. (Oh!) Yes! I say a farce, whether
            you regard the age of the acolyte or the indifferent proportion of water with which it
            would be performed. (Uproar, oh, oh! and some cheering from the Baptist section.) But I
            will not now further enter into these things,” said Mr. Cutwater, who knew his cue
            perfectly well, “I can hold these opinions and still love my brethren of other
            denominations. I move, as an amendment, that a committee, consisting of one minister and
            one layman to be selected from each of the Churches, be appointed to take charge of the
            physical well-being and mental and spiritual training of the infant.”
By this proposition, which was received with enthusiasm, Ginx's Baby was to be
            incontinently pitched into an arena of polemical warfare. Every one was willing that a
            committee should fight out the question vicariously; and, therefore, when Mr. Slowboy
            seconded the amendment, it was carried with loud acclamations.
But they were not yet out of the wood. On proceeding to nominate members of the
            committee, the Unitarians and Quakers claimed to be represented. The platform and the
            meeting were by the ears again. It was fiercely contended that only Evangelical
            Christians could have a place in such a work, and many of the nominees declared that
            they would not sit on a committee with—well, some curious epithets were used. The
            Unitarians and Quakers took their stand on the Catholic principles embodied in the
            amendment, and on the fact that Ginx's Baby had now “become national Protestant
            property.” Mr. Cutwater and a few others, moved by the scandal of the dispute,
            interfered, and the committee was at length constituted to the satisfaction of all
            parties. It was to be called “The Branch Committee of the Protestant Detectoral Union
            for promoting the Physical and Spiritual Well-being of Ginx's Baby.”
A fourth resolution was adopted, “That the subject should be treated in the
            Metropolitan pulpits on the next Sabbath, and a collection taken up in the various
            churches for the benefit of the infant.” This promised well for Master Ginx's
            future.
The meeting had lasted five hours, and while they were discussing him the child grew
            hungry. In the tumult every one had forgotten the subject of it, and now it was over,
            they dispersed without thought of him. But he would not allow those near him at all
            events to overlook his presence.
Some, foreseeing that awkwardness was impending, slipped away; while three or four
            stayed to ask what was to be done with him.
“Hand him over to the custody of the Chairman,” said a Mr. Dove.
“I should be most happy,” said he, smoothly, “but Mrs. Trumpeter is out of town. Could
            your dear wife take him, Mr. Dove?”
Mr. Dove's wife was otherwise engaged.
The Secretary was unmarried—chambers at Nincome's Inn.
In the midst of their distress a woman who had been hanging about the hall near the
            platform, came forward and offered to take charge of him, “for the sake of the cause.”
            Every one was relieved. After her name and address had been hastily noted, the
            Protestant baby was placed in her arms. My Lord Evergood, the Chairman, the clergy, the
            Secretary, and the mob went home rejoicing. Some hours after, Ginx's Baby, stripped of
            the duchess's beautiful robes, was found by a policeman, lying on a doorstep in one of
            the narrow streets, not a hundred yards behind the Philopragmon. By an ironical chance
            he was wrapped in a copy of the largest daily paper in the world.
</div></body></text></TEI>