<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Ginx's Baby, by Edward Jenkins</title><author>Jenkins, John Edward (1838-1910).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1870</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="32">
V.—Party Tactics—and Political Obstructions to Social Reform.
In the Club our hero revelled awhile under the protection of Sir Charles Sterling, and
            the petting of peers, Members of Parliament, and loungers who swarm therein. Certain
            gentlemen of Stock Exchange mannerism and dressiness gave the protege the go-by, and
            even sneered at those who noticed him with kindness. But then these are of the men with
            whom every question is checked by money, and is balanced on the pivot of profit and
            loss. I dare say some of them thought the worse of Judas only because he had made so
            small a gain out of his celebrated transaction. To foster Ginx's Baby in the Club, as a
            recognition of the important questions surrounding him, though these questions involved
            hundreds of thousands of other cases, was to them ridiculous. Of far greater consequence
            was it in their eyes to settle a dispute between two extravagant fools at Constantinople
            and Cairo, and quicken the sluggishness of Turkish consols or Egyptian 9 per cents. I do
            not cast stones at them; every man must look at a thing with his own eyes.
But it was curious to note how the Baby's fortunes shifted in the Club. There were
            times—when he was a pet chucked under chin by the elder stagers, favored with a smile
            from a Cabinet Minister, and now and then blessed with a nod from Mr. Joshua Hale. Then,
            again, every one seemed to forget him, and he was for months left unnoticed to the
            chance kindness of the menials until some case similar to his own happening to evoke
            discussion in the press, there would be a general inquiry for him. The porter, Mr.
            Smirke, had succeeded, by means of a detective, in discovering the boy's name, but his
            parents were then half-way to Canada.
The members of the Fogey Club opposite, hearing that so interesting a foundling was
            being cherished by their opponents, politely asked leave to examine him, and he
            occasionally visited them. They treated him kindly and discussed his condition with
            earnestness. The leaders of the party debated whether he might not with advantage be
            taken out of their opponents' hands. Some thought that a judicious use of him might win
            popularity; but others objected that it would be perilous for them to mix themselves up
            with so doleful an interest. In the result the Fogies tipped young Ginx, but did not
            commit themselves for or against him. Thus a long time elapsed, and our hero had grown
            old enough to be a page. He had received food, clothing, and goodwill, but no one had
            thought of giving him an education. Sometimes he became obstreperous. He played tricks
            with the Club cutlery, and diverted its silver to improper uses; he laid traps for
            upsetting aged and infirm legislators; he tried the coolness of the youngest and
            best-natured Members of Parliament by popping up in strange places and exhibiting
            unseemly attitudes. At length, by unanimous consent, he was decreed to be a nuisance,
            and a few days would have revoked his license at the Club.
No sooner did the Fogies get wind of this than they manoeuvred to get Ginx's Baby under
            their own management. They instructed their “organs,” as they called them, to pipe to
            popular feeling on the disgraceful apathy of the Radicals in regard to the foundling.
            They had him waylaid and treated to confectionery by their emissaries; and once or twice
            succeeded in abducting him and sending him down to the country with their party's
            candidates, for exhibition at elections.
The Radicals resented this conduct extremely. Ginx's Baby was brought back to the Club
            and restored to favor. The Government papers were instructed to detail how much he was
            petted and talked about by the party; to declare how needless was the popular excitement
            on his behalf; and to prove that he must, without any special legislation, be benefited
            by the extraordinary organic changes then being made in the constitution of the
            country.
Sir Charles Sterling resumed his interest in the boy. He had been gallantly aiding his
            party in other questions. There was the Timbuctoo question. A miserable desert chief had
            shut up a wandering Englishman, not possessed of wit enough to keep his head out of
            danger. There was a general impression that English honor was at stake, and the previous
            Fogey Government had ordered an expedition to cross the desert and punish the sheikh.
            You would never believe what it cost if you had not seen the bill. Ten millions sterling
            was as good as buried in the desert, when one-tenth of it would have saved a hundred
            thousand people from starvation at home, and one-hundredth part of it would have taken
            the fetters off the hapless prisoner's feet.
There was the St. Helena question always brooding over Parliament. St. Helena was a
            constituent part of the British Empire. Every patriot agreed that the Empire without it
            would be incomplete; and was so far right that its subtraction would have left the
            Empire by so much less. Most of its inhabitants were aboriginal—a mercurial race, full
            of fire, quick-witted, and gifted with the exuberant eloquence of savages, but deficient
            in dignity and self-control. Before any one else had been given them by Providence to
            fight, they slaughtered and ravaged one another. Our intrusive British ancestors stepped
            upon the island, and, being strong men, mowed down the islanders like wheat, and
            appropriated the lands their swords had cleared. Still the aborigines held out in
            corners, and defied the conquerors. The latter ground them down, confiscated the
            property of their half-dozen chiefs, and distributed it among themselves. By way of
            showing their imperial imperiousness, they built over some ruins left by their
            devastations a great church, in which they ordered all the islanders to worship. This
            was at first abomination to the islanders, who fought like devils whenever they could,
            and ended by accepting the religion of their foes. But the conquerors, afterwards
            choosing to change their own faith, resolved that the islanders should do so too.
            Forthwith they confiscated the big church and burying-ground, and, distributing part of
            the land and spoils among their most prominent scamps, erected a new edifice of quite a
            different character, in which the natives swore they could neither see nor hear, and
            their own clerics warned them they would certainly be damned. To make the complications
            more intricate, these clerics owed allegiance to an ancient woman in a distant country,
            who had all the meddlesomeness and petty jealousy of her sex, and was, besides, much
            attached to some clever wooers of hers, wily sinners who covered their aims under the
            semblance of ultra-extreme passion for her. The prominent scamps died, to be succeeded
            by their children, or other of the hated conquerors, from generation to generation. The
            islanders went on increasing and protesting. T hey starved upon the lands, and shot the
            landlords when a few gave them the chance, for most lived away in their own country, and
            left the property to be administered by agents. The Home Government had again and again
            been obliged to assist these people with soldiers, to provide an armed police, to shoot
            down mobs, to catch a ringleader here or there and send him to Fernando Po, or to
            deprive whole villages of ordinary civil rights. Then the yam crop failed, and nearly
            half the people left the island and crossed the seas, where they continued to hate and
            to plot against those whose misfortune it had been to get a legacy of the island from
            their fathers. It would be wearisome to recount the absurdities on both sides: the
            stupidity or criminal absence of tact from time to time shown by the Home Government—the
            resolve never to be quiet exhibited by the natives, under the prompting of their
            clerics. Upon “—that common stage of novelty—” there were ever springing up fresh
            difficulties. Secret clubs were formed for murder and reprisal. A body called the
            “Yellows” had bound themselves by private oaths to keep up the memory of the religious
            victories of their predecessors, and to worry the clerical party in every possible way.
            Their pleasure was to go about insanely blowing rams'-horns, carrying flags and bearing
            oranges in their hands. The islanders hated oranges, and at every opportunity cracked
            the skulls of the orange-bearers with brutal weapons peculiar to the island. These, in
            return, cracked native skulls. The whole island was in a state of perpetual commotion.
            Still, its general condition improved, its farms grew prosperous, and a joint-stock
            company had built a mill for converting cocoanut fibre into horse-cloths, which yielded
            large profits. The memory of past events might well have been buried; but the clerics,
            in the interest of the old woman, fanned the embers, and the infamous bidding for
            popularity of parties at home served to keep alive passions that would naturally have
            died out. Besides, latterly folly had been too organized on both sides to suffer
            oblivion. Everybody was tired of the squabbles of St. Helena. At length there was a
            general movement in the interests of peace, and to pacify the islanders Parliament was
            asked to pull down the wings of the old church edifice, remove some of the graves, and
            cut off a large piece of the graveyard. Some were in favor also of dividing all the
            farms in the country among the aborigines, but the difficulty was to know how at the
            same time to satisfy the present occupiers. These schemes were topics of high debate,
            upon them the fortunes of Government rose and fell, and while they were agitated Ginx's
            Baby could have no chance of a parliamentary hearing. Many other matters of singular
            indifference had eaten up the legislative time; but at last the increasing number of
            wretched infants throughout the country began to alarm the people, and Sir Charles
            Sterling thought the time had come to move on behalf of Ginx's Baby and his fellows.
</div></body></text></TEI>