
CHAPTER XXX
One of the most remarkable families that have ever flourished in England were the
      NEUCHATELS. Their founder was a Swiss, who had established a banking house of high repute in
      England in the latter part of the eighteenth century, and, irrespective of a powerful domestic
      connection, had in time pretty well engrossed the largest and best portion of foreign banking
      business. When the great French Revolution occurred, all the emigrants deposited their jewels
      and their treasure with the Neuchatels. As the disturbance spread, their example was followed
      by the alarmed proprietors and capitalists of the rest of Europe; and, independently of their
      own considerable means, the Neuchatels thus had the command for a quarter of a century, more
      or less, of adventitious millions. They were scrupulous and faithful stewards, but they were
      doubtless repaid for their vigilance, their anxiety, and often their risk, by the
      opportunities which these rare resources permitted them to enjoy. One of the Neuchatels was a
      favourite of Mr. Pitt, and assisted the great statesman in his vast financial arrangements.
      This Neuchatel was a man of large capacity, and thoroughly understood his period. The minister
      wished to introduce him to public life, would have opened Parliament to him, and no doubt have
      showered upon him honours and titles. But Neuchatel declined these overtures. He was one of
      those strong minds who will concentrate their energies on one object; without personal vanity,
      but with a deep-seated pride in the future. He was always preparing for his posterity.
      Governed by this passion, although he himself would have been content to live for ever in
      Bishopsgate Street, where he was born, he had become possessed of a vast principality, and
      which, strange to say, with every advantage of splendour and natural beauty, was not an hour’s
      drive from Whitechapel.
HAINAULT HOUSE had been raised by a British peer in the days when nobles were fond of
      building Palladian palaces. It was a chief work of Sir William Chambers, and in its style, its
      beauty, and almost in its dimensions, was a rival of Stowe or Wanstead. It stood in a deer
      park, and was surrounded by a royal forest. The family that had raised it wore out in the
      earlier part of this century. It was supposed that the place must be destroyed and dismantled.
      It was too vast for a citizen, and the locality was no longer sufficiently refined for a
      conscript father. In this dilemma, Neuchatel stepped in and purchased the whole affair—palace,
      and park, and deer, and pictures, and halls, and galleries of statue and bust, and furniture,
      and even wines, and all the farms that remained, and all the seigneurial rights in the royal
      forest. But he never lived there. Though he spared nothing in the maintenance and the
      improvement of the domain, except on a Sunday he never visited it, and was never known to
      sleep under its roof. “It will be ready for those who come after me,” he would remark, with a
      modest smile.
Those who came after him were two sons, between whom his millions were divided; and Adrian,
      the eldest, in addition to his share, was made the lord of Hainault. Adrian had inherited
      something more, and something more precious, than his father’s treasure—a not inferior
      capacity, united, in his case, with much culture, and with a worldly ambition to which his
      father was a stranger. So long as that father lived, Adrian had been extremely circumspect. He
      seemed only devoted to business, and to model his conduct on that of his eminent sire. That
      father who had recognised with pride and satisfaction his capacity, and who was without
      jealousy, had initiated his son during his lifetime in all the secrets of his wondrous craft,
      and had entrusted him with a leading part in their affairs. Adrian had waited in Downing
      Street on Lord Liverpool, as his father years before had waited on Mr. Pitt.
The elder Neuchatel departed this life a little before the second French Revolution of 1830,
      which had been so fatal to Mr. Ferrars. Adrian, who had never committed himself in politics,
      further than sitting a short time for a reputed Tory borough, for which he paid a rent of a
      thousand a year to the proprietor, but who was known to have been nurtured in the school of
      Pitt and Wellington, astonished the world by voting for Lord Grey’s Reform Bill, and
      announcing himself as a Liberal. This was a large fish for the new Liberal Treasury to
      capture; their triumph was great, and they determined to show that they appreciated the power
      and the influence of their new ally. At the dissolution of 1831, Adrian Neuchatel was a
      candidate for a popular constituency, and was elected at the head of the poll. His brother,
      Melchior, was also returned, and a nephew. The Liberals were alarmed by a subscription of
      fabulous dimensions said to have been collected by the Tories to influence the General
      Election; and the undoubted contribution of a noble duke was particularly mentioned, which
      alone appalled the heart of Brooks’. The matter was put before Neuchatel, as he entered the
      club, to which he had been recently elected with acclamation. “So you are a little
      frightened,” he said, with a peculiarly witching smile which he had, half mockery and half
      good nature; as much as to say, “I will do what you wish, but I see through you and everybody
      else.” “So you are a little frightened. Well; we City men must see what we can do against the
      dukes. You may put me down for double his amount.”
Adrian purchased a very fine mansion in Portland Place, and took up his residence formally
      at Hainault. He delighted in the place, and to dwell there in a manner becoming the scene had
      always been one of his dreams. Now he lived there with unbounded expenditure. He was
      passionately fond of horses, and even in his father’s lifetime had run some at Newmarket in
      another name. The stables at Hainault had been modelled on those at Chantilly, and were almost
      as splendid a pile as the mansion itself. They were soon full, and of first-rate animals in
      their different ways. With his choice teams Adrian could reach Bishopsgate from Hainault,
      particularly if there were no stoppages in Whitechapel, in much under an hour.
If he had fifty persons in his stables, there were certainly as many in his park and
      gardens. These latter were most elaborate. It seemed there was nothing that Hainault could not
      produce: all the fruits and flowers of the tropics. The conservatories and forcing-houses
      looked, in the distance, like a city of glass. But, after all, the portion of this immense
      establishment which was most renowned, and perhaps, on the whole, best appreciated, was the
      establishment of the kitchen. The chef was the greatest celebrity of Europe; and he had no
      limit to his staff, which he had selected with the utmost scrutiny, maintained with becoming
      spirit, and winnowed with unceasing vigilance. Every day at Hainault was a banquet. What
      delighted Adrian was to bring down without notice a troop of friends, conscious they would be
      received as well as if there had been a preparation of weeks. Sometimes it was a body from the
      Stock Exchange, sometimes a host from the House of Commons, sometimes a board of directors
      with whom he had been transacting business in the morning. It delighted Adrian to see them
      quaffing his burgundy, and stuffing down his truffles, and his choice pies from Strasbourg,
      and all the delicate dishes which many of them looked at with wonder, and tasted with
      timidity. And then he would, with his particular smile, say to a brother bank director, whose
      mouth was full, and who could only answer him with his eyes, “Business gives one an appetite;
      eh, Mr. Trodgits?”
Sunday was always a great day at Hainault. The Royal and the Stock Exchanges were both of
      them always fully represented; and then they often had an opportunity, which they highly
      appreciated, of seeing and conferring with some public characters, M.P.‘s of note or promise,
      and occasionally a secretary of the Treasury, or a privy councillor. “Turtle makes all men
      equal,” Adrian would observe. “Our friend Trodgits seemed a little embarrassed at first, when
      I introduced him to the Right Honourable; but when they sate next each other at dinner, they
      soon got on very well.”
On Sunday the guests walked about and amused themselves. No one was allowed to ride or
      drive; Mrs. Neuchatel did not like riding and driving on Sundays. “I see no harm in it,” said
      Adrian, “but I like women to have their way about religion. And you may go to the stables and
      see the horses, and that might take up the morning. And then there are the houses; they will
      amuse you. For my part, I am for a stroll in the forest;” and then he would lead his
      companions, after a delightful ramble, to some spot of agrestic charm, and, looking at it with
      delight, would say, “Pretty, is it not? But then they say this place is not fashionable. It
      will do, I think, for us City men.”
Adrian had married, when very young, a lady selected by his father. The selection seemed a
      good one. She was the daughter of a most eminent banker, and had herself, though that was of
      slight importance, a large portion. She was a woman of abilities, highly cultivated. Nothing
      had ever been spared that she should possess every possible accomplishment, and acquire every
      information and grace that it was desirable to attain. She was a linguist, a fine musician, no
      mean artist; and she threw out, if she willed it, the treasures of her well-stored and not
      unimaginative mind with ease and sometimes eloquence. Her person, without being absolutely
      beautiful, was interesting. There was even a degree of fascination in her brown velvet eyes.
      And yet Mrs. Neuchatel was not a contented spirit; and though she appreciated the great
      qualities of her husband, and viewed him even with reverence as well as affection, she
      scarcely contributed to his happiness as much as became her. And for this reason. Whether it
      were the result of physical organisation, or whether it were the satiety which was the
      consequence of having been born, and bred, and lived for ever, in a society of which wealth
      was the prime object of existence, and practically the test of excellence, Mrs. Neuchatel had
      imbibed not merely a contempt for money, but absolutely a hatred of it. The prosperity of her
      house depressed her. The stables with their fifty grooms, and the grounds with their fifty
      gardeners, and the daily visit of the head cook to pass the bill of fare, were incidents and
      circumstances that made her melancholy. She looked upon the Stock Exchange coming down to
      dinner as she would on an invasion of the Visigoths, and endured the stiff observations or the
      cumbrous liveliness of the merchants and bank directors with gloomy grace. Something less
      material might be anticipated from the members of Parliament. But whether they thought it
      would please the genius of the place, or whether Adrian selected his friends from those who
      sympathised with his pursuits, the members of Parliament seemed wonderfully to accord with the
      general tone of the conversation, or varied it only by indulging in technical talk of their
      own. Sometimes she would make a desperate effort to change the elements of their society;
      something in this way: “I see M. Arago and M. Mignet have arrived here, Adrian. Do not you
      think we ought to invite them here? And then you might ask Mr. Macaulay to meet them. You said
      you wished to ask Mr. Macaulay.”
In one respect the alliance between Adrian and his wife was not an unfortunate one. A woman,
      and a woman of abilities, fastidious, and inclined to be querulous, might safely be counted on
      as, in general, ensuring for both parties in their union an unsatisfactory and unhappy life.
      But Adrian, though kind, generous, and indulgent, was so absorbed by his own great affairs,
      was a man at the same time of so serene a temper and so supreme a will, that the over-refined
      fantasies of his wife produced not the slightest effect on the course of his life. Adrian
      Neuchatel was what very few people are—master in his own house. With a rich varnish of
      graciousness and favour, he never swerved from his purpose; and, though willing to effect all
      things by smiles and sweet temper, he had none of that morbid sensibility which allows some
      men to fret over a phrase, to be tortured by a sigh, or to be subdued by a tear.
There had been born of this marriage only one child, the greatest heiress in England. She
      had been christened after her father, ADRIANA. She was now about seventeen; and, had she not
      been endowed with the finest disposition and the sweetest temper in the world, she must have
      been spoiled, for both her parents idolised her. To see her every day was for Adrian a reward
      for all his labours, and in the midst of his greatest affairs he would always snatch a moment
      to think how he could contribute to her pleasure or her happiness. All that was rare and
      delightful and beautiful in the world was at her command. There was no limit to the
      gratification of her wishes. But, alas! this favoured maiden wished for nothing. Her books
      interested her, and a beautiful nature; but she liked to be alone, or with her mother. She was
      impressed with the horrible and humiliating conviction, that she was courted and admired only
      for her wealth.
This advertisement met the eye of Myra at Hurstley Rectory about a month after her father’s
      death, and she resolved to answer it. Her reply pleased Mr. Neuchatel. He selected it out of
      hundreds, and placed himself in communication with Mr. Penruddock. The result was, that Miss
      Ferrars was to pay a visit to the Neuchatels; and if, on experience, they liked each other,
      the engagement was to take place.
In the meantime the good rector of Hurstley arrived on the previous evening with his
      precious charge at Hainault House; and was rewarded for his kind exertions, not only by the
      prospect of assisting Myra, but by some present experience of a splendid and unusual
      scene.
