
CHAPTER XLI
“I know, sir, you are prejudiced against me,” said Prince Florestan, bowing before Mr.
      Wilton with a sort of haughty humility, “and therefore I the more appreciate your
      condescension in receiving me.”
“I have no wish to refer to the past,” said Mr. Wilton somewhat sternly. “You mentioned in
      your letter that my co-operation was necessary with reference to your private affairs, of
      which I once was a trustee, and under those circumstances I felt it my duty to accede to your
      request. I wish our communication to be limited to that business.”
“It shall be so strictly,” said the prince; “you may remember, sir, that at the unhappy
      period when we were deprived of our throne, the name of Queen Agrippina was inscribed on the
      great book of the state for a considerable sum, for which the credit of the state was pledged
      to her. It was strictly her private property, and had mainly accrued through the sale of the
      estates of her ancestors. This sum was confiscated, and several other amounts, which belonged
      to members of our house and to our friends. It was an act of pure rapine, so gross, that as
      time revolved, and the sense of justice gradually returned to the hearts of men, restitution
      was made in every instance except my own, though I have reason to believe that individual
      claim was the strongest. My bankers, the house of Neuchatel, who have much interested
      themselves in this matter, and have considerable influence with the government that succeeded
      us, have brought things to this pass, that we have reason to believe our claim would be
      conceded, if some of the foreign governments, and especially the government of this country,
      would signify that the settlement would not be disagreeable to them.” And the prince ceased,
      and raising his eyes, which were downcast as he spoke, looked Mr. Wilton straight in the
      face.
“Before such a proposal could even be considered by Her Majesty’s Government,” said Mr.
      Wilton with a reddening cheek, “the intimation must be made to them by authority. If the
      minister of your country has such an intimation to make to ours, he should address himself to
      the proper quarter, to Lord Roehampton.”
“I understand,” said Prince Florestan; “but governments, like individuals, sometimes shrink
      from formality. The government of my country will act on the intimation, but they do not care
      to make it an affair of despatches.”
“There is only one way of transacting business,” said Mr. Wilton frigidly, and as if, so far
      as he was concerned, the interview was ended.
“I have been advised on high authority,” said Prince Florestan, speaking very slowly, “that
      if any member of the present cabinet will mention in conversation to the representative of my
      country here, that the act of justice would not be disagreeable to the British Government, the
      affair is finished.”
“I doubt whether any one of my colleagues would be prepared to undertake a personal
      interference of that kind with a foreign government,” said Mr. Wilton stiffly. “For my own
      part, I have had quite enough of such interpositions never to venture on them again.”
“The expression of feeling desired would involve no sort of engagement,” said the
      imperturbable prince.
“That depends on the conscience of the individual who interferes. No man of honour would be
      justified in so interposing if he believed he was thus furnishing arms against the very
      government of which he solicited the favour.”
“But why should he believe this?” asked the prince with great calmness.
“I think upon reflection,” said Mr. Wilton, taking up at the same time an opened letter
      which was before him, as if he wished to resume the private business on which he had been
      previously engaged, “that your royal highness might find very adequate reasons for the
      belief.”
“I would put this before you with great deference, sir,” said the prince. “Take my own case;
      is it not more likely that I should lead that life of refined retirement, which I really
      desire, were I in possession of the means to maintain such a position with becoming dignity,
      than if I were distressed, and harassed, and disgusted, every day, with sights and incidents
      which alike outrage my taste and self-respect? It is not prosperity, according to common
      belief, that makes conspirators.”
“You were in a position, and a refined position,” rejoined Mr. Wilton sharply; “you
      had means adequate to all that a gentleman could desire, and might have been a person of great
      consideration, and you wantonly destroyed all this.”
“It might be remembered that I was young.”
“Yes, you were young, very young, and your folly was condoned. You might have begun life
      again, for to the world at least you were a man of honour. You had not deceived the world,
      whatever you might have done to others.”
“If I presume to make another remark,” said the prince calmly, but pale, “it is only,
      believe me, sir, from the profound respect I feel for you. Do not misunderstand these
      feelings, sir. They are not unbecoming the past. Now that my mother has departed, there is no
      one to whom I am attached except yourself. I have no feeling whatever towards any other human
      being. All my thought and all my sentiment are engrossed by my country. But pardon me, dear
      sir, for so let me call you, if I venture to say that, in your decision on my conduct, you
      have never taken into consideration the position which I inherited.”
“I do not follow you, sir.”
“You never will remember that I am the child of destiny,” said Prince Florestan. “That
      destiny will again place me on the throne of my fathers. That is as certain as I am now
      speaking to you. But destiny for its fulfilment ordains action. Its decrees are inexorable,
      but they are obscure, and the being whose career it directs is as a man travelling in a dark
      night; he reaches his goal even without the aid of stars or moon.”
“I really do not understand what destiny means,” said Mr. Wilton. “I understand what conduct
      means, and I recognise that it should be regulated by truth and honour. I think a man had
      better have nothing to do with destiny, particularly if it is to make him forfeit his
      parole.”
“Ah! sir, I well know that on that head you entertain a great prejudice in my respect.
      Believe me it is not just. Even lawyers acknowledge that a contract which is impossible cannot
      be violated. My return from America was inevitable. The aspirations of a great people and of
      many communities required my presence in Europe. My return was the natural development of the
      inevitable principle of historical necessity.”
“Well, that principle is not recognised by Her Majesty’s Ministers,” said Mr. Wilton, and
      both himself and the prince seemed to rise at the same time.
“I thank you, sir, for this interview,” said his royal highness. “You will not help me, but
      what I require will happen by some other means. It is necessary, and therefore it will
      occur.”
The prince remounted his horse, and rode off quickly till he reached the Strand, where
      obstacles to rapid progress commenced, and though impatient, it was some time before he
      reached Bishopsgate Street. He entered the spacious courtyard of a noble mansion, and, giving
      his horse to the groom, inquired for Mr. Neuchatel, to whom he was at once ushered,—seated in
      a fine apartment at a table covered with many papers.
“Well, my prince,” said Mr. Neuchatel with a smiling eye, “what brings such a great man into
      the City to-day? Have you seen your great friend?” And then Prince Florestan gave Mr.
      Neuchatel a succinct but sufficient summary of his recent interview.
“Ah!” said Mr. Neuchatel, “so it is, so it is; I dare say if you were received at St.
      James’, Mr. Sidney Wilton would not be so very particular; but we must take things as we find
      them. If our fine friends will not help us, you must try us poor business men in the City. We
      can manage things here sometimes which puzzle them at the West End. I saw you were disturbed
      when you came in. Put on a good countenance. Nobody should ever look anxious except those who
      have no anxiety. I dare say you would like to know how your account is. I will send for it. It
      is not so bad as you think. I put a thousand pounds to it in the hope that your fine friend
      would help us, but I shall not take it off again. My Louis is going to-night to Paris, and he
      shall call upon the ministers and see what can be done. In the meantime, good appetite, sir. I
      am going to luncheon, and there is a place for you. And I will show you my Gainsborough that I
      have just bought, from a family for whom it was painted. The face is divine, very like our
      Miss Ferrars. I am going to send the picture down to Hainault. I won’t tell you what I gave
      for it, because perhaps you would tell my wife and she would be very angry. She would want the
      money for an infant school. But I think she has schools enough. Now to lunch.”
On the afternoon of this day there was a half-holiday at the office, and Endymion had
      engaged to accompany Waldershare on some expedition. They had been talking together in his
      room where Waldershare was finishing his careless toilette, which however was never finished,
      and they had just opened the house door and were sallying forth when Colonel Albert rode up.
      He gave a kind nod to Endymion, but did not speak, and the companions went on. “By the by,
      Ferrars,” said Waldershare, pressing his arm and bubbling with excitement, “I have found out
      who your colonel is. It is a wondrous tale, and I will tell it all to you as we go on.”
