
CHAPTER LVI
Endymion was glad to meet Baron Sergius one day when he dined with Prince Florestan. There
      were several distinguished foreigners among the guests, who had just arrived. They talked
      much, and with much emphasis. One of them, the Marquis of Vallombrosa, expatiated on the Latin
      race, their great qualities, their vivacity, invention, vividness of perception, chivalrous
      valour, and sympathy with tradition. The northern races detested them, and the height of
      statesmanship was to combine the Latin races into an organised and active alliance against the
      barbarism which menaced them. There had been for a short time a vacant place next to Endymion,
      when Baron Sergius, according to his quiet manner, stole into the room and slipped into the
      unoccupied seat. “It is some time since we met,” he said, “but I have heard of you. You are
      now a public man, and not a public character. That is a not unsatisfactory position.”
The prince listened apparently with much interest to the Marquis of Vallombrosa,
      occasionally asked him a question, and promoted discussion without himself giving any opinion.
      Baron Sergius never spoke except to Endymion, and then chiefly social inquiries about Lord and
      Lady Roehampton, their good friends the Neuchatels, and frequently about Mr. Sidney Wilton,
      whom, it appeared, he had known years ago, and intimately. After dinner the guests, on the
      return to the saloon, ranged themselves in a circle, but not too formally, and the prince
      moving round addressed each of them in turn. When this royal ceremony was concluded, the
      prince motioned to the Marquis of Vallombrosa to accompany him, and then they repaired to an
      adjacent salon, the door of which was open, but where they could converse without observation.
      The Duke of St. Angelo amused the remaining guests with all the resources of a man practised
      in making people feel at their ease, and in this he was soon greatly assisted by Mr.
      Waldershare, who was unable to dine with the prince to-day, but who seemed to take much
      interest in this arrival of the representatives of the Latin race.
Baron Sergius and Endymion were sitting together rather apart from the rest. The baron said,
      “You have heard to-day a great deal about the Latin race, their wondrous qualities, their
      peculiar destiny, their possible danger. It is a new idea, or rather a new phrase, that I
      observe is now getting into the political world, and is probably destined to produce
      consequences. No man will treat with indifference the principle of race. It is the key of
      history, and why history is often so confused is that it has been written by men who were
      ignorant of this principle and all the knowledge it involves. As one who may become a
      statesman and assist in governing mankind, it is necessary that you should not be insensible
      to it; whether you encounter its influence in communities or in individuals, its qualities
      must ever be taken into account. But there is no subject which more requires discriminating
      knowledge, or where your illustrating principle, if you are not deeply founded, may not chance
      to turn out a will-o’-the-wisp. Now this great question of the Latin race, by which M. de
      Vallombrosa may succeed in disturbing the world—it might be well to inquire where the Latin
      race is to be found. In the North of Italy, peopled by Germans and named after Germans, or in
      the South of Italy, swarming with the descendants of Normans and Arabs? Shall we find the
      Latin race in Spain, stocked by Goths, and Moors, and Jews? Or in France, where there is a
      great Celtic nation, occasionally mingled with Franks? Now I do not want to go into the origin
      of man and nations—I am essentially practical, and only endeavour to comprehend that with
      which I have personally to deal, and that is sufficiently difficult. In Europe I find three
      great races with distinct qualities—the Teutons, the Sclaves, and the Celts; and their conduct
      will be influenced by those distinctive qualities. There is another great race which
      influences the world, the Semites. Certainly, when I was at the Congress of Vienna, I did not
      believe that the Arabs were more likely to become a conquering race again than the Tartars,
      and yet it is a question at this moment whether Mehemet Ali, at their head, may not found a
      new empire in the Mediterranean. The Semites are unquestionably a great race, for among the
      few things in this world which appear to be certain, nothing is more sure than that they
      invented our alphabet. But the Semites now exercise a vast influence over affairs by their
      smallest though most peculiar family, the Jews. There is no race gifted with so much tenacity,
      and such skill in organisation. These qualities have given them an unprecedented hold over
      property and illimitable credit. As you advance in life, and get experience in affairs, the
      Jews will cross you everywhere. They have long been stealing into our secret diplomacy, which
      they have almost appropriated; in another quarter of a century they will claim their share of
      open government. Well, these are races; men and bodies of men influenced in their conduct by
      their particular organisation, and which must enter into all the calculations of a statesman.
      But what do they mean by the Latin race? Language and religion do not make a race—there is
      only one thing which makes a race, and that is blood.”
“But the prince,” said Endymion inquiringly; “he seemed much interested in what M. de
      Vallombrosa was saying; I should like to know what his opinions are about the Latin race.”
“The prince rarely gives an opinion,” said the baron. “Indeed, as you well know, he rarely
      speaks; he thinks and he acts.”
“But if he acts on wrong information,” continued Endymion, “there will probably be only one
      consequence.”
“The prince is very wise,” said the baron; “and, trust me, knows as much about mankind, and
      the varieties of mankind, as any one. He may not believe in the Latin race, but he may choose
      to use those who do believe in it. The weakness of the prince, if he have one, is not want of
      knowledge, or want of judgment, but an over-confidence in his star, which sometimes seduces
      him into enterprises which he himself feels at the time are not perfectly sound.”
