
CHAPTER XXVIII
There was ever, when separated, an uninterrupted correspondence between Berengaria and
      Endymion. They wrote to each other every day, so that when they met again there was no void in
      their lives and mutual experience, and each was acquainted with almost every feeling and
      incident that had been proved, or had occurred, since they parted. The startling news,
      however, communicated by the king had not previously reached Endymion, because he was on the
      eve of his return to England, and his correspondents had been requested to direct their future
      letters to his residence in London.
His voyage home was an agitated one, and not sanguine or inspiriting. There was a terrible
      uncertainty in the future. What were the feelings of Lady Montfort towards himself? Friendly,
      kind, affectionate, in a certain sense, even devoted, no doubt; but all consistent with a deep
      and determined friendship which sought and wished for no return more ardent. But now she was
      free. Yes, but would she again forfeit her freedom? And if she did, would it not be to attain
      some great end, probably the great end of her life? Lady Montfort was a woman of far-reaching
      ambition. In a certain degree, she had married to secure her lofty aims; and yet it was only
      by her singular energy, and the playfulness and high spirit of her temperament, that the
      sacrifice had not proved a failure; her success, however, was limited, for the ally on who she
      had counted rarely assisted and never sympathised with her. It was true she admired and even
      loved her husband; her vanity, which was not slight, was gratified by her conquest of one whom
      it had seemed no one could subdue, and who apparently placed at her feet all the power and
      magnificence which she appreciated.
Poor Endymion, who loved her passionately, over whom she exercised the influence of a
      divinity, who would do nothing without consulting her, and who was moulded, and who wished to
      be moulded, by her inspiring will, was also a shrewd man of the world, and did not permit his
      sentiment to cloud his perception of life and its doings. He felt that Lady Montfort had
      fallen from a lofty position, and she was not of a temperament that would quietly brook her
      fate. Instead of being the mistress of castles and palaces, with princely means, and all the
      splendid accidents of life at her command, she was now a dowager with a jointure! Still young,
      with her charms unimpaired, heightened even by the maturity of her fascinating qualities,
      would she endure this? She might retain her friendship for one who, as his sister ever
      impressed upon him, had no root in the land, and even that friendship, he felt conscious, must
      yield much of its entireness and intimacy to the influence of new ties; but for their lives
      ever being joined together, as had sometimes been his wild dreams, his cheek, though alone,
      burned with the consciousness of his folly and self-deception.
“He is one of our rising statesmen,” whispered the captain of the vessel to a passenger, as
      Endymion, silent, lonely, and absorbed, walked, as was his daily custom, the quarterdeck. “I
      daresay he has a good load on his mind. Do you know, I would sooner be a captain of a ship
      than a minister of state?”
Poor Endymion! Yes, he bore his burthen, but it was not secrets of state that overwhelmed
      him. If his mind for a moment quitted the contemplation of Lady Montfort, it was only to
      encounter the recollection of a heart-rending separation from his sister, and his strange and
      now perplexing relations with Adriana.
Lord Montfort had passed the summer, as he had announced, at Princedown, and alone; that is
      to say, without Lady Montfort. She wrote to him frequently, and if she omitted doing so for a
      longer interval than usual, he would indite to her a little note, always courteous, sometimes
      even almost kind, reminding her that her letters amused him, and that of late they had been
      rarer than he wished. Lady Montfort herself made Montfort Castle her home, paying sometimes a
      visit to her family in the neighbourhood, and sometimes receiving them and other guests. Lord
      Montfort himself did not live in absolute solitude. He had society always at command. He
      always had a court about him; equerries, and secretaries, and doctors, and odd and amusing men
      whom they found out for him, and who were well pleased to find themselves in his beautiful and
      magnificent Princedown, wandering in woods and parks and pleasaunces, devouring his choice
       entrees, and quaffing his curious wines. Sometimes he dined with them, sometimes a
      few dined with him, sometimes he was not seen for weeks; but whether he were visible or not,
      he was the subject of constant thought and conversation by all under his roof.
Lord Montfort, it may be remembered, was a great fisherman. It was the only sport which
      retained a hold upon him. The solitude, the charming scenery, and the requisite skill,
      combined to please him. He had a love for nature, and he gratified it in this pursuit. His
      domain abounded in those bright chalky streams which the trout love. He liked to watch the
      moor-hens, too, and especially a kingfisher.
Lord Montfort came home late one day after much wading. It had been a fine day for anglers,
      soft and not too bright, and he had been tempted to remain long in the water. He drove home
      rapidly, but it was in an open carriage, and when the sun set there was a cold autumnal
      breeze. He complained at night, and said he had been chilled. There was always a doctor under
      the roof, who felt his patient’s pulse, ordered the usual remedies, and encouraged him. Lord
      Montfort passed a bad night, and his physician in the morning found fever, and feared there
      were symptoms of pleurisy. He prescribed accordingly, but summoned from town two great
      authorities. The great authorities did not arrive until the next day. They approved of
      everything that had been done, but shook their heads. “No immediate danger, but serious.”
Four-and-twenty hours afterwards they inquired of Lord Montfort whether they should send for
      his wife. “On no account whatever,” he replied. “My orders on this head are absolute.”
      Nevertheless, they did send for Lady Montfort, and as there was even then a telegraph to the
      north, Berengaria, who departed from her castle instantly, and travelled all night, arrived in
      eight-and-forty hours at Princedown. The state of Lord Montfort then was critical.
It was broken to Lord Montfort that his wife had arrived.
“I perceive then,” he replied, “that I am going to die, because I am disobeyed.”
These were the last words he uttered. He turned in his bed as it were to conceal his
      countenance, and expired without a sigh or sound.
There was not a single person at Princedown in whom Lady Montfort could confide. She had
      summoned the family solicitor, but he could not arrive until the next day, and until he came
      she insisted that none of her late lord’s papers should be touched. She at first thought he
      had made a will, because otherwise all his property would go to his cousin, whom he
      particularly hated, and yet on reflection she could hardly fancy his making a will. It was a
      trouble to him—a disagreeable trouble; and there was nobody she knew whom he would care to
      benefit. He was not a man who would leave anything to hospitals and charities. Therefore, on
      the whole, she arrived at the conclusion he had not made a will, though all the guests at
      Princedown were of a different opinion, and each was calculating the amount of his own
      legacy.
At last the lawyer arrived, and he brought the will with him. It was very short, and not
      very recent. Everything he had in the world except the settled estates, Montfort Castle and
      Montfort House, he bequeathed to his wife. It was a vast inheritance; not only Princedown, but
      great accumulations of personal property, for Lord Montfort was fond of amassing, and admired
      the sweet simplicity of the three per cents.
