<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER XLII</head>
<p>Endymion had now passed three years of his life in London, and considering the hard
      circumstances under which he had commenced this career, he might on the whole look back to
      those years without dissatisfaction. Three years ago he was poor and friendless, utterly
      ignorant of the world, and with nothing to guide him but his own good sense. His slender
      salary had not yet been increased, but with the generosity and aid of his sister and the
      liberality of Mr. Vigo, he was easy in his circumstances. Through the Rodneys, he had become
      acquainted with a certain sort of miscellaneous life, a knowledge of which is highly valuable
      to a youth, but which is seldom attained without risk. Endymion, on the contrary, was always
      guarded from danger. Through his most unexpected connection with the Neuchatel family, he had
      seen something of life in circles of refinement and high consideration, and had even caught
      glimpses of that great world of which he read so much and heard people talk more, the world of
      the Lord Roehamptons and the Lady Montforts, and all those dazzling people whose sayings and
      doings form the taste, and supply the conversation, and leaven the existence of admiring or
      wondering millions.</p>
<p>None of these incidents, however, had induced any change in the scheme of his existence.
      Endymion was still content with his cleanly and airy garret; still dined at Joe’s; was still
      sedulous at his office, and always popular with his fellow clerks. Seymour Hicks, indeed, who
      studied the “Morning Post” with intentness, had discovered the name of Endymion in the
      elaborate lists of attendants on Mrs. Neuchatel’s receptions, and had duly notified the
      important event to his colleagues; but Endymion was not severely bantered on the occasion,
      for, since the withdrawal of St. Barbe from the bureau, the stock of envy at Somerset House
      was sensibly diminished.</p>
<p>His lodging at the Rodneys’, however, had brought Endymion something more valuable than an
      innocuous familiarity with their various and suggestive life. In the friendship of Waldershare
      he found a rich compensation for being withdrawn from his school and deprived of his
      university. The care of his father had made Endymion a good classical scholar, and he had
      realised a degree of culture which it delighted the brilliant and eccentric Waldershare to
      enrich and to complete. Waldershare guided his opinions, and directed his studies, and formed
      his taste. Alone at night in his garret, there was no solitude, for he had always some book or
      some periodical, English or foreign, with which Waldershare had supplied him, and which he
      assured Endymion it was absolutely necessary that he should read and master.</p>
<p>Nor was his acquaintance with Baron Sergius less valuable, or less fruitful of results. He
      too became interested in Endymion, and poured forth to him, apparently without reserve, all
      the treasures of his vast experience of men and things, especially with reference to the
      conduct of external affairs. He initiated him in the cardinal principles of the policies of
      different nations; he revealed to him the real character of the chief actors in the scene.
      “The first requisite,” Baron Sergius would say, “in the successful conduct of public affairs
      is a personal acquaintance with the statesmen engaged. It is possible that events may not
      depend now, so much as they did a century ago, on individual feeling, but, even if prompted by
      general principles, their application and management are always coloured by the idiosyncrasy
      of the chief actors. The great advantage which your Lord Roehampton, for example, has over all
      his colleagues in <hi>la haute politique</hi>, is that he was one of your plenipotentiaries at
      the Congress of Vienna. There he learned to gauge the men who govern the world. Do you think a
      man like that, called upon to deal with a Metternich or a Pozzo, has no advantage over an
      individual who never leaves his chair in Downing Street except to kill grouse? Pah! Metternich
      and Pozzo know very well that Lord Roehampton knows them, and they set about affairs with him
      in a totally different spirit from that with which they circumvent some statesman who has
      issued from the barricades of Paris.”</p>
<p>Nor must it be forgotten that his debating society and the acquaintance which he had formed
      there, were highly beneficial to Endymion. Under the roof of Mr. Bertie Tremaine he enjoyed
      the opportunity of forming an acquaintance with a large body of young men of breeding, of high
      education, and full of ambition, that was a substitute for the society, becoming his youth and
      station, which he had lost by not going to the university.</p>
<p>With all these individuals, and with all their circles, Endymion was a favourite. No doubt
      his good looks, his mien—which was both cheerful and pensive—his graceful and quiet manners,
      all told in his favour, and gave him a good start, but further acquaintance always sustained
      the first impression. He was intelligent and well-informed, without any alarming originality,
      or too positive convictions. He listened not only with patience but with interest to all, and
      ever avoided controversy. Here are some of the elements of a man’s popularity.</p>
<p>What was his intellectual reach, and what his real character, it was difficult at this time
      to decide. He was still very young, only on the verge of his twentieth year; and his character
      had no doubt been influenced, it might be suppressed, by the crushing misfortunes of his
      family. The influence of his sister was supreme over him. She had never reconciled herself to
      their fall. She had existed only on the solitary idea of regaining their position, and she had
      never omitted an occasion to impress upon him that he had a great mission, and that, aided by
      her devotion, he would fulfil it. What his own conviction on this subject was may be obscure.
      Perhaps he was organically of that cheerful and easy nature, which is content to enjoy the
      present, and not brood over the past. The future may throw light upon all these points; at
      present it may be admitted that the three years of seemingly bitter and mortifying adversity
      have not been altogether wanting in beneficial elements in the formation of his character and
      the fashioning of his future life.</p>
</div>