<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER XIX</head>
<p>Disappointment and distress, it might be said despair, seemed fast settling again over the
      devoted roof of Hurstley, after a three years’ truce of tranquillity. Even the crushing
      termination of her worldly hopes was forgotten for the moment by Mrs. Ferrars in her anguish
      at the prospect of separation from Endymion. Such a catastrophe she had never for a moment
      contemplated. True it was she had been delighted with the scheme of his entering the Foreign
      Office, but that was on the assumption that she was to enter office herself, and that,
      whatever might be the scene of the daily labours of her darling child, her roof should be his
      home, and her indulgent care always at his command. But that she was absolutely to part with
      Endymion, and that, at his tender age, he was to be launched alone into the wide world, was an
      idea that she could not entertain, or even comprehend. Who was to clothe him, and feed him,
      and tend him, and save him from being run over, and guide and guard him in all the
      difficulties and dangers of this mundane existence? It was madness, it was impossible. But Mr.
      Ferrars, though gentle, was firm. No doubt it was to be wished that the event could have been
      postponed for a year; but its occurrence, unless all prospect of establishment in life were
      surrendered, was inevitable, and a slight delay would hardly render the conditions under which
      it happened less trying. Though Endymion was only sixteen, he was tall and manly beyond his
      age, and during the latter years of his life, his naturally sweet temper and genial
      disposition had been schooled in self-discipline and self-sacrifice. He was not to be wholly
      left to strangers; Mr. Ferrars had spoken to Rodney about receiving him, at least for the
      present, and steps would be taken that those who presided over his office would be influenced
      in his favour. The appointment was certainly not equal to what had been originally
      anticipated; but still the department, though not distinguished, was highly respectable, and
      there was no reason on earth, if the opportunity offered, that Endymion should not be removed
      from his present post to one in the higher departments of the state. But if this opening were
      rejected, what was to be the future of their son? They could not afford to send him to the
      University, nor did Mr. Ferrars wish him to take refuge in the bosom of the Church. As for the
      army, they had now no interest to acquire commissions, and if they could succeed so far, they
      could not make him an allowance, which would permit him to maintain himself as became his
      rank. The civil service remained, in which his grandfather had been eminent, and in which his
      own parent, at any rate, though the victim of a revolution, had not disgraced himself. It
      seemed, under the circumstances, the natural avenue for their child. At least, he thought it
      ought to be tried. He wished nothing to be settled without the full concurrence of Endymion
      himself. The matter should be put fairly and clearly before him, “and for this purpose,”
      concluded Mr. Ferrars, “I have just sent for him to my room;” and he retired.</p>
<p>The interview between the father and the son was long. When Endymion left the room his
      countenance was pale, but its expression was firm and determined. He went forth into the
      garden, and there he saw Myra. “How long you have been!” she said; “I have been watching for
      you. What is settled?”</p>
<p>He took her arm, and in silence led her away into one of the glades Then he said: “I have
      settled to go, and I am resolved, so long as I live, that I will never cost dear papa another
      shilling. Things here are very bad, quite as bad as you have sometimes fancied. But do not say
      anything to poor mamma about them.”</p>
<p>Mr. Ferrars resolved that Endymion should go to London immediately, and the preparations for
      his departure were urgent. Myra did everything. If she had been the head of a family she could
      not have been more thoughtful or apparently more experienced. If she had a doubt, she stepped
      over to Mrs. Penruddock and consulted her. As for Mrs. Ferrars, she had become very unwell,
      and unable to attend to anything. Her occasional interference, fitful and feverish, and
      without adequate regard to circumstances, only embarrassed them. But, generally speaking, she
      kept to her own room, and was always weeping.</p>
<p>The last day came. No one pretended not to be serious and grave. Mrs. Ferrars did not
      appear, but saw Endymion alone. She did not speak, but locked him in her arms for many
      minutes, and then kissed him on the forehead, and, by a gentle motion, intimating that he
      should retire, she fell back on her sofa with closed eyes. He was alone for a short time with
      his father after dinner. Mr. Ferrars said to him: “I have treated you in this matter as a man,
      and I have entire confidence in you. Your business in life is to build up again a family which
      was once honoured.”</p>
<p>Myra was still copying inventories when he returned to the drawing-room. “These are for
      myself,” she said, “so I shall always know what you ought to have. Though you go so early, I
      shall make your breakfast to-morrow,” and, leaning back on the sofa, she took his hand.
      “Things are dark, and I fancy they will be darker; but brightness will come, somehow or other,
      to you, darling, for you are born for brightness. You will find friends in life, and they will
      be women.”</p>
<p>It was nearly three years since Endymion had travelled down to Hurstley by the same coach
      that was now carrying him to London. Though apparently so uneventful, the period had not been
      unimportant in the formation, doubtless yet partial, of his character. And all its influences
      had been beneficial to him. The crust of pride and selfishness with which large prosperity and
      illimitable indulgence had encased a kind, and far from presumptuous, disposition had been
      removed; the domestic sentiments in their sweetness and purity had been developed; he had
      acquired some skills in scholarship and no inconsiderable fund of sound information; and the
      routine of religious thought had been superseded in his instance by an amount of knowledge and
      feeling on matters theological, unusual at his time of life. Though apparently not gifted with
      any dangerous vivacity, or fatal facility of acquisition, his mind seemed clear and
      painstaking, and distinguished by common sense. He was brave and accurate.</p>
<p>Mr. Rodney was in waiting for him at the inn. He seemed a most distinguished gentleman. A
      hackney coach carried them to Warwick Street, where he was welcomed by Mrs. Rodney, who was
      exquisitely dressed. There was also her sister, a girl not older than Endymion, the very image
      of Mrs. Rodney, except that she was a brunette—a brilliant brunette. This sister bore the
      romantic name of Imogene, for which she was indebted to her father performing the part of the
      husband of the heroine in Maturin’s tragedy of the “Castle of St. Aldobrand,” and which, under
      the inspiration of Kean, had set the town in a blaze about the time of her birth. Tea was
      awaiting him, and there was a mixture in their several manners of not ungraceful hospitality
      and the remembrance of past dependence, which was genuine and not uninteresting, though
      Endymion was yet too inexperienced to observe all this.</p>
<p>Mrs. Rodney talked very much of Endymion’s mother; her wondrous beauty, her more wondrous
      dresses; the splendour of her fetes and equipages. As she dilated on the past, she seemed to
      share its lustre and its triumphs. “The first of the land were always in attendance on her,”
      and for Mrs. Rodney’s part, she never saw a real horsewoman since her dear lady. Her sister
      did not speak, but listened with rapt attention to the gorgeous details, occasionally stealing
      a glance at Endymion—a glance of deep interest, of admiration mingled as it were both with
      reverence and pity.</p>
<p>Mr. Rodney took up the conversation if his wife paused. He spoke of all the leading
      statesmen who had been the habitual companions of Mr. Ferrars, and threw out several anecdotes
      respecting them from personal experience. “I knew them all,” continued Mr. Rodney, “I might
      say intimately;” and then he told his great anecdote, how he had been so fortunate as perhaps
      even to save the Duke’s life during the Reform Bill riots. “His Grace has never forgotten it,
      and only the day before yesterday I met him in St. James’ Street walking with Mr. Arbuthnot,
      and he touched his hat to me.”</p>
<p>All this gossip and good nature, and the kind and lively scene, saved Endymion from the
      inevitable pang, or at least greatly softened it, which accompanies our first separation from
      home. In due season, Mrs. Rodney observed that she doubted not Mr. Endymion, for so they ever
      called him, must be wearied with his journey, and would like to retire to his room; and her
      husband, immediately lighting a candle, prepared to introduce their new lodger to his
      quarters.</p>
<p>It was a tall house, which had recently been renovated, with a story added to it, and on
      this story was Endymion’s chamber; not absolutely a garret, but a modern substitute for that
      sort of apartment. “It is rather high,” said Mr. Rodney, half apologising for the ascent, “but
      Mr. Ferrars himself chose the room. We took the liberty of lighting a fire to-night.”</p>
<p>And the cheerful blaze was welcome. It lit up a room clean and not uncomfortable. Feminine
      solicitude had fashioned a toilette-table for him, and there was a bunch of geraniums in a
      blue vase on its sparkling dimity garniture. “I suppose you have in your bag all that you want
      at present?” said Mr. Rodney. “To-morrow we will unpack your trunks and arrange your things in
      their drawers; and after breakfast, if you please, I will show you your way to Somerset
      House.”</p>
<p>Somerset House! thought Endymion, as he stood before the fire alone. Is it so near as that?
      To-morrow, and I am to be at Somerset House! And then he thought of what they were doing at
      Hurstley—of that terrible parting with his mother, which made him choke—and of his father’s
      last words. And then he thought of Myra, and the tears stole down his cheek. And then he knelt
      down by his bedside and prayed.</p>
</div>