<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER IX</head>
<p>Availing himself of his latch-key, Ferrars re-entered his home unnoticed. He went at once to
      his library, and locked the door of the apartment. There sitting before his desk, he buried
      his face in his hands and remained in that posture for a considerable time.</p>
<p>They were tumultuous and awful thoughts that passed over his brain. The dreams of a life
      were dissipated, and he had to encounter the stern reality of his position—and that was Ruin.
      He was without hope and without resource. His debts were vast; his patrimony was a fable; and
      the mysterious inheritance of his wife had been tampered with. The elder Ferrars had left an
      insolvent estate; he had supported his son liberally, but latterly from his son’s own
      resources. The father had made himself the principal trustee of the son’s marriage settlement.
      His colleague, a relative of the heiress, had died, and care was taken that no one should be
      substituted in his stead. All this had been discovered by Ferrars on his father’s death, but
      ambition, and the excitement of a life of blended elation and peril, had sustained him under
      the concussion. One by one every chance had vanished: first his private means and then his
      public prospects; he had lost office, and now he was about to lose parliament. His whole
      position, so long, and carefully, and skilfully built up, seemed to dissolve and dissipate
      into insignificant fragments. And now he had to break the situation to his wife. She was to
      become the unprepared partner of the secret which had gnawed at his heart for years, during
      which to her his mien had often been smiling and always serene. Mrs. Ferrars was at home, and
      alone, in her luxurious boudoir, and he went to her at once. After years of dissimulation, now
      that all was over, Ferrars could not bear the suspense of four-and-twenty hours.</p>
<p>It was difficult to bring her into a mood of mind capable of comprehending a tithe of what
      she had to learn; and yet the darkest part of the tale she was never to know. Mrs. Ferrars,
      though singularly intuitive, shrank from controversy, and settled everything by contradiction
      and assertion. She maintained for a long time that what her husband communicated to her could
      not be; that it was absurd and even impossible. After a while, she talked of selling her
      diamonds and reducing her equipage, sacrificing which she assumed would put everything right.
      And when she found her husband still grave and still intimating that the sacrifices must be
      beyond all this, and that they must prepare for the life and habits of another social sphere,
      she became violent, and wept and declared her wrongs; that she had been deceived and outraged
      and infamously treated.</p>
<p>Remembering how long and with what apparent serenity in her presence he had endured his
      secret woes, and how one of the principal objects of his life had ever been to guard her even
      from a shade of solicitude, even the restrained Ferrars was affected; his countenance changed
      and his eyes became suffused. When she observed this, she suddenly threw her arms round his
      neck and with many embraces, amid sighs and tears, exclaimed, “O William! if we love each
      other, what does anything signify?”</p>
<p>And what could anything signify under such circumstances and on such conditions? As Ferrars
      pressed his beautiful wife to his heart, he remembered only his early love, which seemed
      entirely to revive. Unconsciously to himself, too, he was greatly relieved by this burst of
      tenderness on her part, for the prospect of this interview had been most distressful to him.
      “My darling,” he said, “ours is not a case of common imprudence or misfortune. We are the
      victims of a revolution, and we must bear our lot as becomes us under such circumstances.
      Individual misfortunes are merged in the greater catastrophe of the country.”</p>
<p>“That is the true view,” said his wife; “and, after all, the poor King of France is much
      worse off than we are. However, I cannot now buy the Duchesse of Sevres’ lace, which I had
      promised her to do. It is rather awkward. However, the best way always is to speak the truth.
      I must tell the duchess I am powerless, and that we are the victims of a revolution, like
      herself.”</p>
<p>Then they began to talk quite cosily together over their prospects, he sitting on the sofa
      by her side and holding her hand. Mrs. Ferrars would not hear of retiring to the continent.
      “No,” she said, with all her sanguine vein returning, “you always used to say I brought you
      luck, and I will bring you luck yet. There must be a reaction. The wheel will turn and bring
      round our friends again. Do not let us then be out of the way. Your claims are immense. They
      must do something for you. They ought to give you India, and if we only set our mind upon it,
      we shall get it. Depend upon it, things are not so bad as they seem. What appear to be
      calamities are often the sources of fortune. I would much sooner that you should be
      Governor-General than a cabinet minister. That odious House of Commons is very wearisome. I am
      not sure any constitution can bear it very long. I am not sure whether I would not prefer
      being Governor-General of India even to being Prime-Minister.”</p>
</div>