
THE MOAT HOUSE

You thought you knew me in and out
And yet you never knew
That all I ever thought about
Was you.

Sedgehill High Street is nothing but a part of the great high road which leads from
     Silverhampton to Studley and Slipton and the other towns of the Black Country; but it calls
     itself Sedgehill High Street as it passes through the place, and so identifies itself with its
     environment, after the manner of caterpillars and polar bears and other similarly wise and
     adaptable beings. At the point where this road adopts the pseudonym of the High Street, close
     by Sedgehill Church, a lane branches off from it at right angles, and runs down a steep slope
     until it comes to a place where it evidently experiences a difference of opinion as to which is
     the better course to pursue—an experience not confined to lanes. But in this respect lanes are
     happier than men and women, in that they are able to pursue both courses, and so learn for
     themselves which is the wiser one, as is the case with this particular lane. One course leads
     headlong down another steep hill—so steep that unwary travellers usually descend from their
     carriages
      to walk up or down it, and thus are enabled to ensure relief to their horses and a
     chill to themselves at the same time; for it is hot work walking up or down that sunny
     precipice, and the cold winds of Mershire await one with equal gusto at the top and at the
     bottom. At the foot of the hill stretches a breezy common, wide enough to make one think "long,
     long thoughts"; and if the traveller looks backward when he has crossed this common, he will
     see Sedgehill Church, crowning and commanding the vast expanse, and pointing heavenward with
     its slender spire to remind him, and all other wayfaring men, that the beauty and glory of this
     present world is only an earnest and a foretaste of something infinitely fairer.
The second course of the irresolute lane is less adventurous, and wanders peacefully through
     Badgering Woods, a dark and delightful spot, once mysterious enough to be a fitting
     hiding-place for the age-long slumbers of some sleeping princess. As a matter of fact, so it
     was; the princess was black but comely, and her name was Coal. There she had slept for a
     century of centuries, until Prince Iron needed and sought and found her, and awakened her with
     the noise of his kisses. So now the wood is not asleep any more, but is filled with the
     tramping of the prince's men. The old people wring their hands and mourn that the former things
     are passing away, and that Mershire's youthful beauty will soon be forgotten; but the young
     people laugh and are glad, because they know that life is greater than beauty, and that it is
     by her black coalfields, and not by her green woodlands, that Mershire will save her people
     from poverty, and will satisfy her poor with bread.
When Elisabeth Farringdon was a girl, the princess was still asleep in the heart of the wood,
     and no
      prince had yet attempted to disturb her; and the lane passed through a forest of
     silence until it came to a dear little brown stream, which, by means of a dam, was turned into
     a moat, encircling one of the most ancient houses in England. The Moat House had been vacant
     for some time, as the owner was a delicate man who preferred to live abroad; and great was the
     interest at Sedgehill when, a year or two after Elisabeth left school, it was reported that a
     stranger, Alan Tremaine by name, had taken the Moat House for the sake of the hunting, which
     was very good in that part of Mershire.
So Alan settled there, and became one of the items which went to the making of Elisabeth's
     world. He was a small, slight man, interesting-looking rather than regularly handsome, of about
     five-and-twenty, who had devoted himself to the cultivation of his intellect and the
     suppression of his soul. Because his mother had been a religious woman, he reasoned that faith
     was merely an amiable feminine weakness, and because he himself was clever enough to make
     passable Latin verses, he argued that no Supernatural Being could have been clever enough to
     make him.
"Have you seen the new man who has come to the Moat House?" asked Elisabeth of Christopher.
     The latter had now settled down permanently at the Osierfield, and was qualifying himself to
     take his uncle's place as general manager of the works, when that uncle should retire from the
     post. He was also qualifying himself to be Elisabeth's friend instead of her lover—a far more
     difficult task.
"Yes; I have seen him."
"What is he like? I am dying to know."
"When I saw him he was exactly like a man riding on horseback; but as he was obviously too
     well-dressed
      to be a beggar, I have no reason to believe that the direction in which he was
     riding was the one which beggars on horseback are proverbially expected to take."
"How silly you are! You know what I mean."
"Perfectly. You mean that if you had seen a man riding by, at the rate of twelve miles an
     hour, it would at once have formed an opinion as to all the workings of his mind and the
     meditations of his heart. But my impressions are of slower growth, and I am even dull enough to
     require some foundation for them." Christopher loved to tease Elisabeth.
"I am awfully quick in reading character," remarked that young lady, with some pride.
"You are. I never know which impresses me more—the rapidity with which you form opinions, or
     their inaccuracy when formed."
"I'm not as stupid as you think."
"Pardon me, I don't think you are at all stupid; but I am always hoping that the experience
     of life will make you a little stupider."
"Don't be a goose, but tell me all you know about Mr. Tremaine."
"I don't know much about him, except that he is well-off, that he apparently rides about ten
     stone, and that he is not what people call orthodox. By the way. I didn't discover his
     unorthodoxy by seeing him ride by, as you would have done; I was told about it by some people
     who know him."
"How very interesting!" cried Elisabeth enthusiastically. "I wonder how unorthodox he is. Do
     you think he doesn't believe in anything?"
"In himself, I fancy. Even the baldest creed is usually self-embracing. But I believe he
     indulges in
      the not unfashionable luxury of doubts. You might attend to them, Elisabeth; you
     are the sort of girl who would enjoy attending to doubts."
"I suppose I really am too fond of arguing."
"There you misjudge yourself. You are instructive rather than argumentative. Saying the same
     thing over and over again in different language is not arguing, you know; I should rather call
     it preaching, if I were not afraid of hurting your feelings."
"You are a very rude boy! But, anyway, I have taught you a lot of things; you can't deny
     that."
"I don't wish to deny it; I am your eternal debtor. To tell the truth, I believe you have
     taught me everything I know, that is worth knowing, except the things that you have tried to
     teach me. There, I must confess, you have signally failed."
"What have I tried to teach you?"
"Heaps of things: that pleasure is more important than duty; that we are sent into the world
     to enjoy ourselves; that the worship of art is the only soul-satisfying form of faith; that
     conscience is an exhausted force; that feelings and emotions ought to be labelled and
     scheduled; that lobster is digestible; that Miss Herbert is the most attractive woman in the
     world; etcetera, etcetera."
"And what have I taught you without trying?"
"Ah! that is a large order; and it is remarkable that the things you have taught me are just
     the things that you have never learned yourself."
"Then I couldn't have taught them."
"But you did; that is where your genius comes in."
"I really am tremendously quick in judging character," repeated Elisabeth thoughtfully; "if I
     met
      you for the first time I should know in five minutes that you were a man with
     plenty of head, and heaps of soul, and very little heart."
"That would show wonderful penetration on your part."
"You may laugh, but I should. Of course, as it is, it is not particularly clever of me to
     understand you thoroughly; I have known you so long."
"Exactly; it would only be distinctly careless of you if you did not."
"Of course it would; but I do. I could draw a map of your mind with my eyes shut, I know it
     so well."
"I wish you would. I should value it even if it were drawn with your eyes open, though
     possibly in that case it might be less correct."
"I will, if you will give me a pencil and a sheet of paper."
Christopher produced a pencil, and tore a half-sheet off a note that he had in his pocket.
     The two were walking through the wood at the Willows at that moment, and Elisabeth straightway
     sat down upon a felled tree that happened to be lying there, and began to draw.
The young man watched her with amusement. "An extensive outline," he remarked; "this is
     gratifying."
"Oh yes! you have plenty of mind, such as it is; nobody could deny that."
"But why is the coast-line all irregular, with such a lot of bays and capes and
     headlands?"
"To show that you are an undecided person, and given to split hairs, and don't always know
     your own opinion. First you think you'll do a thing because it is nice; and then you think you
     won't do it
     because it is wrong; and in the end you drop between two stools, like Mahomet's
     coffin."
"I see. And please what are the mountain-ranges that you are drawing now?"
"These," replied Elisabeth, covering her map with herring-bones, "are your scruples. Like all
     other mountain-ranges they hinder commerce, make pleasure difficult, and render life generally
     rather uphill work." "Don't I sound exactly as if I was taking a geography class?"
"Or conducting an Inquisition," added Christopher.
"I thought an Inquisition was a Spanish thing that hurt."
"So certain ignorant people say; but it was originally invented, I believe, to eradicate
     error and to maintain truth."
"I am going on with my geography class, so don't interrupt. The rivers in this map, which are
     marked by a few faint lines, are narrow and shallow; they are only found near the coast, and
     never cross the interior of the country at all. These represent your feelings."
"Very ingenious of you! And what is that enormous blotch right in the middle of the country,
     which looks like London and its environs?"
"That is your conscience; its outlying suburbs cover nearly the whole country, you will
     perceive. You will also notice that there are no seaports on the coast of my map; that shows
     that you are self-contained, and that you neither send exports to, nor receive imports from,
     the hearts and minds of other people."
"What ever are those queer little castellated things round the coast that you are drawing
     now?"
     
"Those are floating icebergs, to show that it is a cold country. There, my map is finished,"
     concluded Elisabeth, half closing her eyes and contemplating her handiwork through her
     eyelashes; "and I consider it a most successful sketch."
"It is certainly clever."
"And true, too."
Christopher's eyes twinkled. "Give it me," he said, stretching out his hand; "but sign it
     with your name first. Not there," he added hastily, as Elisabeth began writing a capital E in
     one corner; "right across the middle."
Elisabeth looked up in surprise. "Right across the map itself, do you mean?"
"Yes."
"But it is such a long name that it will cover the whole country."
"I know that."
"It will spoil it."
"I shouldn't be surprised; nevertheless, I always am in favour of realism."
"I don't know where the realism comes in; but I am such an obliging person that I will do
     what you want," said Elisabeth, writing her name right across the half-sheet of paper, in her
     usual dashing style.
"Thank you," said Christopher, taking the paper from her; and he smiled to himself as he saw
     that the name "Elisabeth Farringdon" covered the whole of the imaginary continent from east to
     west. Elisabeth naturally did not know that this was the only true image in her allegory; she
     was as yet far too clever to perceive obvious things. As Chris said, it was not when her eyes
     were open that she was most correct.
     
"I have seen Mr. Tremaine," said Elisabeth to him, a day or two after this. "Cousin Maria
     left her card upon him, and he returned her call yesterday and found us at home. I think he is
     perfectly delightful."
"You do, do you? I knew you would."
"Why?"
"Because, like the Athenians, you live to see or to hear some new thing."
"It wasn't his newness that made me like him; I liked him because he was so interesting. I do
     adore interesting people! I hadn't known him five minutes before he began to talk about really
     deep things; and then I felt I had known him for ages, he was so very understanding."
"Indeed," Christopher said drily.
"By the time we had finished tea he understood me better than you do after all these years. I
     wonder if I shall get to like him better than I like you?"
"I wonder, too." And he really did, with an amount of curiosity that was positively
     painful.
"Of course," remarked Elisabeth thoughtfully, "I shall always like you, because we have been
     friends so long, and you are overgrown with the lichen of old memories and associations. But
     you are not very interesting in the abstract, you see; you are nice and good, but you have not
     heart enough to be really thrilling."
"Still, even if I had a heart, it is possible I might not always wear it on my sleeve for
     Miss Elisabeth Farringdon to peck at."
"Oh yes, you would; you couldn't help it. If you tried to hide it I should see through your
     disguises. I have X rays in my eyes."
     
"Have you? They must be a great convenience."
"Well, at any rate, they keep me from making mistakes," Elisabeth confessed.
"That is fortunate for you. It is a mistake to make mistakes."
"I remember our Dear Lady at Fox How once saying," continued the girl, "that nothing is so
     good for keeping women from making mistakes as a sense of humour."
"I wonder if she was right?"
"She was always right; and in that as in everything else. Have you never noticed that it is
     not the women with a sense of humour who make fools of themselves? They know better than to
     call a thing romantic which is really ridiculous."
"Possibly; but they are sometimes in danger of calling a thing ridiculous which is really
     romantic; and that also is a mistake."
"I suppose it is. I wonder which is worse—to think ridiculous things romantic, or romantic
     things ridiculous? It is rather an interesting point. Which do you think?"
"I don't know. I never thought about it."
"You never do think about things that really matter," exclaimed Elisabeth, with reproof in
     her voice; "that is what makes you so uninteresting to talk to. The fact is you are so wrapped
     up in that tiresome old business that you never have time to attend to the deeper things and
     the hidden meanings of life; but are growing into a regular money-grubber."
"Perhaps so; but you will have the justice to admit it isn't my own money that I am
     grubbing," replied Christopher, who had only reconciled himself
      to giving up all his youthful ambitions and becoming sub-manager of the Osierfield
     by the thought that he might thereby in some roundabout way serve Elisabeth. Like other
     schoolboys he had dreamed his dreams, and prospected wonderful roads to success which his feet
     were destined never to tread; and at first he had asked something more of life than the
     Osierfield was capable of offering him. But finally he had submitted contentedly to the
     inevitable, because—in spite of all his hopes and ambitions—his boyish love for Elisabeth held
     him fast; and now his manly love for Elisabeth held him faster still. But even the chains which
     love had rivetted are capable of galling us sometimes; and although we would not break them,
     even if we could, we grumble at them occasionally—that is to say, if we are merely human, as is
     the case with so many of us.
"It is a great pity," Elisabeth went on, "that you deliberately narrow yourself down to such
     a small world and such petty interests. It is bad enough for old people to be practical and
     sensible and commonplace and all that; but for a man as young as you are it is simply
     disgusting. I can not understand you, because you really are clever and ought to know better;
     but although I am your greatest friend, you never talk to me about anything except the merest
     frivolities."
Christopher bowed his head to the storm and was still—he was one of the people who early
     learn the power of silence; but Elisabeth, having once mounted her high horse, dug her spurs
     into her steed and rode on to victory. In those days she was so dreadfully sure of herself that
     she felt competent to teach anybody anything.
"You laugh at me as long as I am funny and
      I amuse you; but the minute I begin to talk about serious subjects—such as
     feelings and sentiments and emotions—you lose your interest at once, and turn everything into a
     joke. The truth is, you have so persistently suppressed your higher self that it is dying of
     inanition; you'll soon have no higher self left at all. If people don't use their hearts they
     don't have any, like the Kentucky fish that can't see in the dark because they are blind, don't
     you know? Now you should take a leaf out of Mr. Tremaine's book. The first minute I saw him I
     knew that he was the sort of man that cultivated his higher self; he was interested in just the
     things that interest me."
The preacher paused for breath, and looked up to see whether her sermon was being "blessed"
     to her hearer; then suddenly her voice changed—
"What is the matter, Chris?"
"Nothing. Why?"
"Because you look so awfully white. I was talking so fast that I didn't notice it; but I
     expect it is the heat. Do sit down on the grass and rest a bit; it is quite dry; and I'll fan
     you with a big dock leaf."
"I'm all right," replied Christopher, trying to laugh, and succeeding but indifferently.
"But I'm sure you are not, you are so pale; you look just as you looked the day that I
     tumbled off the rick—do you remember it?—and you took me into Mrs. Bateson's to have my head
     bound up. She said you'd got a touch of the sun, and I'm afraid you've got one now."
"Yes, I remember it well enough; but I'm all right now, Betty. Don't worry about me."
"But I do worry when you're ill; I always did. Don't you remember that when you had measles
     and I wasn't allowed to see you, I cried myself to sleep
      for three nights running, because I thought you were going to die, and that
     everything would be vile without you? And then I had a prayer-meeting about you in Mrs.
     Bateson's parlour, and I wrote the hymns for it myself. The Batesons wept over them and
     considered them inspired, and foretold that I should die early in consequence." And Elisabeth
     laughed at the remembrance of her fame.
Christopher laughed too. "That was hard on you! I admit that verse-writing is a crime in a
     woman, but I should hardly call it a capital offence. Still, I should like to have heard the
     hymns. You were great at writing poetry in those days."
"Wasn't I? And I used to be so proud when you said that my poems weren't 'half bad'!"
"No wonder; that was high praise from me. But can't you recall those hymns?"
The hymnist puckered her forehead. "I can remember the beginning of the opening one," she
     said; "it was a six-line-eights, and we sang it to a tune called Stella; it began thus:

"How can we sing like little birds,
And hop about among the boughs?
How can we gambol with the herds,
Or chew the cud among the cows?
How can we pop with all the weasles
Now Christopher has got the measles?"

"Bravo!" exclaimed the subject of the hymn. "You are a born hymn-writer, Elisabeth. The
     shades of Charles Wesley and Dr. Watts bow to your obvious superiority."
"Well, at any rate, I don't believe they ever did better at fourteen; and it shows how
     anxious I was about you even then when you were ill. I am just
      the same now—quite as fond of you as I was then; and you are of me, too, aren't
     you?"
"Quite." Which was perfectly true.
"Then that's all right," said Elisabeth contentedly; "and, you see, it is because I am so
     fond of you that I tell you of your faults. I think you are so good that I want you to be quite
     perfect."
"I see."
The missionary spirit is an admirable thing; but a man rarely does it full justice when it is
     displayed—toward himself—by the object of his devotion.
"If I wasn't so fond of you I shouldn't try to improve you."
"Of course not; and if you were a little fonder of me you wouldn't want to improve me. I
     perfectly understand."
"Dear old Chris! You really are extremely nice in some ways; and if you had only a little
     more heart you would be adorable. And I don't believe you are naturally unfeeling, do you?"
"No—I do not; but I sometimes wish I was."
"Don't say that. It is only that you haven't developed that side of you sufficiently; I feel
     sure the heart is there, but it is dormant. So now you will talk more about feelings, won't
     you?"
"I won't promise that. It is rather stupid to talk about things that one doesn't understand;
     I am sure this is correct, for I have often heard you say so."
"But talking to me about your feelings might help you to understand them, don't you see?"
"Or might help you."
"Oh! I don't want any help; feelings are among the few things that I can understand without
     any assistance. But you are sure you are all right, Chris,
      and haven't got a headache or anything?" And the anxious expression returned to
     Elisabeth's face.
"My head is very well, thank you."
"You don't feel any pain?"
"In my head? distinctly not."
"You are quite well, you are certain?"
"Perfectly certain and quite well. What a fidget you are! Apparently you attach as much
     importance to rosy cheeks as Mother Hankey does."
"A pale face and dark hair are in her eyes the infallible signs of a depraved nature,"
     laughed Elisabeth; "and I have both."
"Yet you fly at me for having one, and that only for a short time. Considering your own
     shortcomings, you should be more charitable."
Elisabeth laughed again as she patted his arm in a sisterly fashion. "Nice old boy! I am
     awfully glad you are all right. It would make me miserable if anything went really wrong with
     you, Chris."
"Then nothing shall go really wrong with me, and you shall not be miserable," said
     Christopher stoutly; "and, therefore, it is fortunate that I don't possess much heart—things
     generally go wrong with the people who have hearts, you know, and not with the people who have
     not; so we perceive how wise was the poet in remarking that whatever is is made after the best
     possible pattern, or words to that effect." With which consoling remark he took leave of his
     liege-lady.
The friendship between Alan Tremaine and Elisabeth Farringdon grew apace during the next
     twelve months. His mind was of the metaphysical and speculative order, which is interesting to
     all women; and hers was of the volatile and vivacious type which is attractive to some men.
     They discussed
      everything under the sun, and some things over it; they read the same books and
     compared notes afterward; they went out sketching together, and instructed each other in the
     ways of art; and they carefully examined the foundations of each other's beliefs, and
     endeavoured respectively to strengthen and undermine the same. Gradually they fell into the
     habit of wondering every morning whether or not they should meet during the coming day; and of
     congratulating themselves nearly every evening that they had succeeded in so meeting.
As for Christopher, he was extremely and increasingly unhappy, and, it must be admitted,
     extremely and increasingly cross in consequence. The fact that he had not the slightest right
     to control Elisabeth's actions, in no way prevented him from highly disapproving of them; and
     the fact that he was too proud to express this disapproval in words, in no way prevented him
     from displaying it in manner. Elisabeth was wonderfully amiable with him, considering how very
     cross he was; but are we not all amiable with people toward whom we—in our inner
     consciousness—know that we are behaving badly?
"I can not make out what you can see in that conceited ass?" he said to her, when Alan
     Tremaine had been living at the Moat House for something over a year.
"Perhaps not; making things out never is your strong point," replied Elisabeth suavely.
"But he is such an ass! I'm sure the other evening, when he trotted out his views on the
     Higher Criticism for your benefit, he made me feel positively ill."
"I found it very interesting; and if, as you say,
      he did it for my benefit, he certainly succeeded in his aim." There were limits to
     the patience of Elisabeth.
"Well, how women can listen to bosh of that kind I can not imagine! What can it matter to you
     what he disbelieves or why he disbelieves it? And it is beastly cheek of him to suppose that it
     can."
"But he is right in supposing it, and it does matter to me. I like to know how old-fashioned
     truths accord or do not accord with modern phases of thought."
"Modern phases of nonsense, you mean! Well, the old-fashioned truths are good enough for me,
     and I'll stick to them, if you please, in spite of Mr. Tremaine's overwhelming arguments; and I
     should advise you to stick to them, too."
"Oh! Chris, I wish you wouldn't be so disagreeable." And Elisabeth sighed. "It is so
     difficult to talk to you when you are like this."
"I'm not disagreeable," replied Christopher mendaciously; "only I can not let you be taken in
     by a stuck-up fool without trying to open your eyes; I shouldn't be your friend if I could."
     And he actually believed that this was the case. He forgot that it is not the trick of
     friendship, but of love, to make "a corner" in affection, and to monopolize the whole stock of
     the commodity.
"You see," Elisabeth explained, "I am so frightfully modern, and yet I have been brought up
     in such a dreadfully old-fashioned way. It was all very well for the last generation to accept
     revealed truth without understanding it, but it won't do for us."
"Why not?"
     
"Oh! because we are young and modern."
"So were they at one time, and we shall not be so for long."
Elisabeth sighed again. "How difficult you are! Of course, the sort of religion that did for
     Cousin Maria and Mr. Smallwood won't do for Mr. Tremaine and me. Can't you see that?"
"I can not, I am sorry to say."
"Their religion had no connection with their intellects."
"Still, it changed their hearts, which I have heard is no unimportant operation."
"They accepted what they were told without trying to understand it," Elisabeth continued,
     "which is not, after all, a high form of faith."
"Indeed. I should have imagined that it was the highest."
"But can't you see that to accept blindly what you are told is not half so great as to sift
     it all, and to separate the chaff from the wheat, and to find the kernel of truth in the shell
     of tradition?" Elisabeth had not talked to Alan Tremaine for over a year without learning his
     tricks of thought and even of expression. "Don't you think that it is better to believe a
     little with the whole intellect than a great deal apart from it?"
Christopher looked obstinate. "I can't and don't."
"Have you no respect for 'honest doubt'?"
"Honest bosh!"
Elisabeth's face flushed. "You really are too rude for anything."
Christopher was penitent at once; he could not bear really to vex her. "I am sorry if I was
     rude; but it riles me to hear you quoting Tremaine's platitudes
      by the yard—such rotten platitudes as they are, too!"
"You don't do Mr. Tremaine justice, Chris. Even though he may have outgrown the old faiths,
     he is a very good man; and he has such lovely thoughts about truth and beauty and love and
     things like that."
"His thoughts are nothing but empty windbags; for he is the type of man who is too ignorant
     to accept truth, too blind to appreciate beauty, and too selfish to be capable of loving any
     woman as a woman ought to be loved."
"I think his ideas about love are quite ideal," persisted the girl. "Only yesterday he was
     abusing the selfishness of men in general, and saying that a man who is really in love thinks
     of the woman he loves as well as of himself."
"He said that, did he? Then he was mistaken."
Elisabeth looked surprised. "Then don't you agree with him that a man in love thinks of the
     woman as well as of himself?"
"No; I don't. A man who is really in love never thinks of himself at all, but only of the
     woman. It strikes me that Master Alan Tremaine knows precious little about the matter."
"I think he knows a great deal. He said that love was the discovery of the one woman whereof
     all other women were but types. That really was a sweet thing to say!"
"My dear Betty, you know no more about the matter than he does. Falling in love doesn't
     merely mean that a man has found a woman who is dearer to him than all other women, but that he
     has found a woman who is dearer to him than himself."
Elisabeth changed her ground. "I admit that
      he isn't what you might call orthodox," she said—"not the sort of man who would
     clothe himself in the rubric, tied on with red tape; but though he may not be a Christian, as
     we count Christianity, he believes with all his heart in an overruling Power which makes for
     righteousness."
"That is very generous of him," retorted Christopher; "still, I can not for the life of me
     see that the possession of three or four thousand a year, without the trouble of earning it,
     gives a man the right to patronize the Almighty."
"You are frightfully narrow, Chris."
"I know I am, and I am thankful for it. I had rather be as narrow as a plumbing-line than
     indulge in the sickly latitudinarianism that such men as Tremaine nickname breadth."
"Oh! I am tired of arguing with you; you are too stupid for anything."
"But you haven't been arguing—you have only been quoting Tremaine verbatim; and that that may
     be tiring I can well believe."
"Well, you can call it what you like; but by any other name it will irritate you just as
     much, because you have such a horrid temper. Your religion may be very orthodox, but I can not
     say much for its improving qualities; it is the crossest, nastiest, narrowest, disagreeablest
     sort of religion that I ever came across."
And Elisabeth walked away in high dudgeon, leaving Christopher very angry with himself for
     having been disagreeable, and still angrier with Tremaine for having been the reverse.
     
