
CECIL FARQUHAR

And my people ask politely
How a friend I know so slightly
Can be more to me than others I have liked a year or so;
But they've never heard the history
Of our transmigration's mystery,
And they've no idea I loved you those millenniums ago.

It was the night of the Academy soirée in the year of Elisabeth's triumph; she was
     being petted and fêted on all sides, and passed through the crowded rooms in a sort of
     royal progress, surrounded by an atmosphere of praise and adulation. Of course she liked
     it—what woman would not?—but she was conscious of a dull ache of sadness, at the back of all
     her joy, that there was no one to share her triumph with her; no one to whom she could say, "I
     care for all this, chiefly because it makes me stronger to help you and worthier to be loved by
     you;" no one who would be made happy by her whisper, "I have set the Thames ablaze in order to
     make warm your fireside."
It was as yet early in the evening when the President turned for a moment from his duties as
     "official receiver" to say to her, "Miss Farringdon, I want to present Farquhar to you. He is a
     rising man, and
      a very good fellow into the bargain, and I know he is most anxious to be
     introduced to you."
And then the usual incantation was gone through, which constitutes an introduction in
     England—namely, the repetition of two names, whereof each person hears only his or her own (an
     item of information by no means new or in any way to be desired), while the name of the other
     contracting party remains shrouded in impenetrable mystery; and Elisabeth found herself face to
     face with the man whom she specially desired to meet.
Cecil Farquhar was a remarkably handsome man, nearer forty than thirty years of age. He was
     tall and graceful, with golden hair and the profile of a Greek statue; and, in addition to
     these palpable charms, he possessed the more subtle ones of a musical voice and a fascinating
     manner. He treated every woman, with whom he was brought into contact, as if she were a
     compound of a child and a queen; and he had a way of looking at her and speaking to her as if
     she were the one woman in the world for whom he had been waiting all his life. That women were
     taken in by this half-caressing, half-worshipping manner was not altogether their fault;
     perhaps it was not altogether his. Very attractive people fall into the habit of attracting,
     and are frequently unconscious of, and therefore irresponsible for, their success.
"It is so good of you to let me be presented to you," he said to Elisabeth, as they walked
     through the crowded rooms in search of a seat; "you don't know how I have longed for it ever
     since I first saw pictures of yours on these walls. And my longing was trebled when I saw your
     glorious Pillar of Cloud, and read all that it was meant to teach."
Elisabeth looked at him slyly through her long
      eyelashes. "How do you know what I meant to teach? Perhaps you read your own
     meanings into it, and not mine."
Farquhar laughed, and Elisabeth thought he had the most beautiful teeth she had ever seen.
     "Perhaps so; but, do you know, Miss Farringdon, I have a shrewd suspicion that my meanings and
     yours are the same."
"What meaning did you read into my picture?" asked Elisabeth, with the dictatorial air of a
     woman who is accustomed to be made much of and deferred to, as he found a seat for her in the
     vestibule, under a palm-tree.
"I read that there was only one answer to the weary problems of labour and capital, and
     masses and classes, and employers and employed, and all the other difficulties that beset and
     threaten any great manufacturing community; and that this answer is to be found to-day—as it
     was found by the Israelites of old—in the pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of fire by
     night, and all of which that pillar is a sign and a sacrament."
"Yes," replied Elisabeth, and her eyes shone like stars; "I meant all that. But how clever of
     you to have read it so correctly!"
"I do not ask if you understood what my picture meant. I know you did; for it was to you, and
     women such as you, that I was speaking."
"Yes; I understood it well enough," replied Elisabeth sadly.
"I knew you would."
"Poor little daughters of Philip! How much happier they would have felt if they had been just
     the same as all the other commonplace Jewish maidens, and had lived ordinary women's lives!"
     
"But how much happier they made other people by their great gift of interpreting to a tired
     world the hidden things of God!" replied Cecil, his face aglow with emotion. "You must never
     forget that, you women of genius, with your power of making men better and women brighter by
     the messages you bring to them! And isn't it a grander thing to help and comfort the whole
     world, than to love, honour, and obey one particular man?"
"I am not sure. I used to think so, but I'm beginning to have my doubts about it. One
     comforts the whole world in a slipshod, sketchy kind of way; but one could do the particular
     man thoroughly!"
"And then find he wasn't worth the doing, in all probability," added Cecil.
"Perhaps." And Elisabeth smiled.
"It is delightful to be really talking to you," exclaimed Cecil; "so delightful that I can
     hardly believe it is true! I have so longed to meet you, because—ever since I first saw your
     pictures—I always knew you would understand."
"And I knew you would understand, too, as soon as I saw The Daughters of Philip," replied
     Elisabeth; and her voice was very soft.
"I think we must have known each other in a former existence," Cecil continued; "because I do
     not feel a bit as if I were being introduced to a stranger, but as if I were meeting an old
     friend. I have so much to tell you about all that has happened to me since you and I played
     together in the shadow of the Sphinx, or worshipped together in the temple at Philæ; and you
     will be interested in it all, won't you?"
"Of course I shall. I shall want to know how
      many centuries ago you first learned what women's hearts and minds were made of,
     and who taught you."
"You taught me, dear lady, one day when we were plucking flowers together at the foot of
     Olympus. Don't you remember it? You ought, as it can't be more than two or three thousand years
     ago."
"And you've never forgotten it?"
"Never; and never shall. If I had, I shouldn't have been an artist. It is the men who
     remember how they lived and loved and suffered during their former incarnations, that paint
     pictures and carve statues and sing songs; and the men who forget everything but this present
     world, that make fortunes and eat dinners and govern states."
"And what about the women?"
"Ah! the women who forget, set their hearts upon the attainment of a fine house and large
     establishment, with a husband thrown in as a makeweight; if they succeed, the world calls them
     happy. While the women who remember, wait patiently for the man who was one with them at the
     beginning of the centuries, and never take any other man in his place; if they find him, they
     are so happy that the world is incapable of understanding how happy they are; and if they don't
     find him in this life, they know they will in another, and they are quite content."
"You really are very interesting," remarked Elisabeth graciously.
"Only because you understand me; most women would think me stupid to a degree if I talked to
     them in this way. But you are interesting to everybody, even to the stupid people. Tell me
     about yourself. Are you really as strong-willed and regal as the world says you are?"
"I don't know," replied Elisabeth; "I fancy it
      depends a good deal upon whom I am talking to. I find as a rule it is a good plan
     to let a weak man think you are obedient, and a strong man think you are wilful, if you want
     men to find you interesting."
"And aren't you strong-minded enough to be indifferent to the fact as to whether men find you
     interesting or the reverse?"
"Oh, dear, no! I am a very old-fashioned person, and I am proud of it. I'd even rather be an
     old woman than a New Woman, if I were driven to be one or the other. I'm not a bit modern, or
      fin-de-siècle; I still believe in God and Man, and all the other comfortable and
     antiquated beliefs."
"How nice of you! But I knew you would, though the world in general does not give you credit
     for anything in the shape of warmth or tenderness; it adores you, you know, but as a sort of
     glorious Snow-Queen, such as Kay and Gerda ran after in dear Hans Andersen."
"I am quite aware of that, and I am afraid I don't much care; though it seems a pity to have
     a thing and not to get the credit for it. I sympathize with those women who have such lovely
     hair that nobody believes that it was grown on the premises; my heart is similarly
     misjudged."
"Lord Stonebridge was talking to me about you and your pictures the other day, and he said
     you would be an ideal woman if only you had a heart."
Elisabeth shrugged her shapely shoulders. "Then you can tell him that I think he would be an
     ideal man if only he had a head; but you can't expect one person to possess all the virtues or
     all the organs; now can you?"
"I suppose not."
"Oh! do look at that woman in white muslin
      and forget-me-nots, with the kittenish manner," exclaimed Elisabeth; "I can't
     stand kittens of over fifty, can you? I have made all my friends promise that if ever they see
     the faintest signs of approaching kittenness in me, as I advance in years, they will have
     recourse without delay to the stable-bucket, which is the natural end of kittens."
"Still, women should make the world think them young as long as possible."
"But when we are kittenish we don't make the world think we are young; we only make it think
     that we think we are young, which is quite a different thing."
"I see," said Cecil, possessing himself of Elisabeth's fan. "Let me fan you. I am afraid you
     find it rather hot here, but I doubt if we could get a seat anywhere else if once we resigned
     this one."
"We should have to be contented with the Chiltern Hundreds, I'm afraid. Besides, I am not a
     bit hot; it is never too warm for me. The thing I hate most in the world is cold; it is the one
     thing that makes it impossible for me to talk, and I'm miserable when I'm not talking. I mean
     to read a paper before the Royal Society some day, to prove that the bacillus of conversation
     can not germinate in a temperature of less than sixty degrees."
"I hate being cold, too. How much alike we are!"
"I loathe going to gorgeous parties in cold houses," continued Elisabeth, "and having
     priceless dinners in fireless rooms. On such occasions I always feel inclined to say to my
     hostess, as the poor do, 'Please, ma'am, may I have a coal-ticket instead of a soup-ticket, if
     I mayn't have both?'"
"You are a fine lady and I am a struggling artist,
      so I want you to tell me who some of these people are," Cecil begged; "I hardly
     know anybody, and I expect there is nobody here that you don't know; so please point out to me
     some of the great of the earth. First, can you tell me who that man is over there, talking to
     the lady in blue? He has such a sad, kind face."
"Oh! that is Lord Wrexham—a charming man and a bachelor. He was jilted a long time ago by
     Mrs. Paul Seaton—Miss Carnaby she was then—and people say he has never got over it. It is she
     that he is talking to now."
"How very interesting! Yes; I like his face, and I am sure he has suffered. It is strange how
     women invariably behave worst to the best men! I'm not sure that I admire her. She is very
     stylish and perfectly dressed, but I don't think I should have broken my heart over her if I
     had been my Lord Wrexham."
"He was perfectly devoted to her, I believe; and she really is attractive when you talk to
     her, she is so very brilliant and amusing."
"She looks brilliant, and a little hard," was Cecil Farquhar's comment.
"I don't think she is really hard, for she adores her husband, and devotes all her time and
     all her talents to helping him politically. He is Postmaster-General, you know; and is bound to
     get still higher office some day."
"Have they any children?"
"No; only politics."
"What is he like? I have never seen him."
"He is an interesting man, and an extremely able one. I should think that as a husband he
     would be too self-opinionated for my taste; but he and his wife
      seem to suit each other down to the ground. Some women like self-opinionated
     men."
"I suppose they do."
"And after all," Elisabeth went on, "if one goes in for a distinguished husband, one must pay
     the price for the article. It is absurd to shoot big game, and then expect to carry it home in
     a market-basket."
"Still it annoys you when men say the same of you, and suggest that an ordinary lump of sugar
     would have sweetened Antony's vinegar more successfully than did Cleopatra's pearl. Your
     conversation and my art have exhausted themselves to prove that this masculine imagination is a
     delusion and a snare; yet the principle must be the same in both cases."
"Not at all; woman's greatness is of her life a thing apart: 'tis man's whole existence."
"Do you think so?" asked Cecil, with that tender look of his which expressed so much and
     meant so little. "You don't know how cold a man feels when his heart is empty."
"Paul Seaton nearly wrecked his career at the outset by writing a very foolish and indiscreet
     book called Shams and Shadows; it was just a toss-up whether he would ever get over it; but he
     did, and now people have pretty nearly forgotten it," continued Elisabeth, who had never heard
     the truth concerning Isabel Carnaby.
"Who is that fat, merry woman coming in now?"
"That is Lady Silverhampton; and the man she is laughing with is Lord Robert Thistletown.
     That lovely girl on the other side of him is his wife. Isn't she exquisite?"
"She is indeed—a most beautiful creature. Now
      if Lord Wrexham had broken his heart over her, I could have understood and almost
     commended him."
"Well, but he didn't, you see. There is nothing more remarkable than the sort of woman that
     breaks men's hearts—except the sort of men that break women's."
"I fancy that the breakableness is in the nature of the heart itself, and not of the
     iconoclast," said Cecil.
Elisabeth looked up quickly. "Oh! I don't. I think that the person who breaks the heart of
     another person must have an immense capacity for commanding love."
"Not at all; the person whose heart is broken has an immense capacity for feeling love. Take
     your Lord Wrexham, for instance: it was not because Miss Carnaby was strong, but because he was
     strong, that his heart was broken in the encounter between them. You can see that in their
     faces."
"I don't agree with you. It was because she was more lovable than loving—at least, as far as
     he was concerned—that the catastrophe happened. A less vivid personality would have been more
     easily forgotten; but if once you begin to care badly for any one with a strong personality
     you're done for."
"You are very modern, in spite of your assertion to the contrary, and therefore very
     subjective. It would never occur to you to look at anything from the objective point of view;
     yet at least five times out of ten it is the correct one."
"You mean that I am too self-willed and domineering?" laughed Elisabeth.
"I mean that it is beside the mark to expect a reigning queen to understand how to canvass
     for votes at a general election."
     
"But you do think me too autocratic, don't you? You must, because everybody does," Elisabeth
     persisted, with engaging candour.
"I think you are the most charming woman I ever met in my life," replied Cecil; and at the
     moment, and for at least five minutes afterward, he really believed what he said.
"Thank you; but you think me too fond of dominating other people, all the same."
"Don't say that; I could not think any evil of you, and it hurts me to hear you even suggest
     that I could. But perhaps it surprises me that so large-hearted a woman as yourself should
     invariably look at things from the subjective point of view, as I am sure you do."
"Right again, Mr. Farquhar; you really are very clever at reading people."
Cecil corrected her. "At reading you, you mean; you are not 'people,' if you please. But tell
     me the truth: when you look at yourself from the outside (which I know you are fond of doing,
     as I am fond of doing), doesn't it surprise you to see as gifted a woman as you must know you
     are, so much more prone to measure your influence upon your surroundings than their influence
     upon you; and, measuring, to allow for it?"
"Nothing that a woman does ever surprises me; and that the woman happens to be one's self is
     a mere matter of detail."
"That is a quibble, dear lady. Please answer my question."
Elisabeth drew her eyebrows together with a puzzled expression. "I don't think it does
     surprise me, because my influence on my surroundings is greater than their influence on me.
     You, too, are a creator;
      and you must know the almost god-like joy of making something out of nothing, and
     seeing that it is good. It seems to me that when once you have tasted that joy, you can never
     again doubt that you yourself are stronger than anything outside you; and that, as the Apostle
     said, 'all things are yours.'"
"Yes; I understand that. But there is still a step further—namely, when you become conscious
     that, strong as you are, there is something stronger than yourself; and that is another
     person's influence upon you."
"I have never felt that," said Elisabeth simply.
"Have you never known what it is to find your own individuality swallowed up in other
     persons' individuality, and your own personality merged in theirs, until—without the slightest
     conscious unselfishness on your part—you cease to have a will of your own?"
"No; and I don't want to know it. I can understand wishing to share one's own principalities
     and powers with another person; but I can't understand being willing to share another person's
     principalities and powers."
"In short," said Cecil, "you feel that you could love sufficiently to give, but not
     sufficiently to receive; you would stamp your image and superscription with pleasure upon
     another person's heart; but you would allow no man to stamp his image and superscription upon
     yours."
"I suppose that is so," replied Elisabeth gravely; "but I never put it as clearly to myself
     as that before. Yes," she went on after a moment's pause; "I could never care enough for any
     man to give up my own will to his; I should always want to bend his to mine, and the more I
     liked him the more I should
      want it. He could have all my powers and possessions, and be welcome to them; but
     my will must always be my own; that is a kingdom I would share with no one."
"Ah! you are treating the question subjectively, as usual. Did it never occur to you that you
     might have no say in the matter; that a man might compel you, by force of his own charm or
     power or love for you, to give up your will to his, whether you would or no?"
Elisabeth looked him full in the face with clear, grave eyes. "No; and I hope I may never
     meet such a man as long as I live. I have always been so strong, and so proud of my strength,
     and so sure of myself, that I could never forgive any one for being stronger than I, and
     wresting my dominion from me."
"Dear lady, you are a genius, and you have climbed to the summit of the giddy pinnacle which
     men call success; but for all that, you are still 'an unlesson'd girl.' Believe me, the strong
     man armed will come some day, and you will lower your flag and rejoice in the lowering."
"You don't understand me, after all," said Elisabeth reproachfully.
Cecil's smile was very pleasant. "Don't I? Yet it was I who painted The Daughters of
     Philip."
There was a moment's constrained silence; and then Elisabeth broke the tension by saying
     lightly—
"Look! there's Lady Silverhampton coming back again. Isn't it a pity she is so stout? I do
     hope I shall never be stout, for flesh is a most difficult thing to live down."
"You are right; there are few things in the world worse than stoutness."
"I only know two: sin and boiled cabbage."
     
"And crochet-antimacassars," added Cecil; "you're forgetting crochet-antimacassars. I speak
     feelingly, because my present lodgings are white with them; and they stick to my coat like
     leeches, and follow me whithersoever I go. I am never alone from them."
"If I were as stout as Lady Silverhampton," said Elisabeth thoughtfully, "I should either cut
     myself up into building lots, or else let myself out into market gardens: I should never go
     about whole; should you?"
"Certainly not; I would rather publish myself in sections, as dictionaries and encyclopædias
     do!"
"Lady Silverhampton presented me," remarked Elisabeth, "so I always feel a sort of
     god-daughterly respect for her, which enhances the pleasure of abusing her."
"What does it feel like to go to Court? Does it frighten you?"
"Oh, dear! no. It would do, I daresay, if you were in plain clothes; but trains and feathers
     make fine birds—with all the manners and habits of fine birds. Peacocks couldn't hop about in
     gutters, and London sparrows couldn't strut across Kensington Gardens, however much they both
     desired it. So when a woman, in addition to her ordinary best clothes, is attended by
     twenty-four yards of good satin which ought to be feeding the poor, nothing really abashes
     her."
"I suppose she feels like a queen."
"Well, to tell the truth, with her train over her arm and her tulle lappets hanging down her
     back, she feels like a widow carrying a waterproof; but she thinks she looks like a duchess,
     and that is a very supporting thought."
     
"Tell me, who is that beautiful woman with the tall soldierly man, coming in now?" said
     Farquhar.
"Oh! those are the Le Mesuriers of Greystone; isn't she divine? And she has the two loveliest
     little boys you ever saw or imagined. I'm longing to paint them."
"She is strikingly handsome."
"There is a very strange story about her and her twin sister, which I'll tell you some
     day."
"You shall; but you must tell me all about yourself first, and how you have come to know so
     much and learn so little."
Elisabeth looked round at him quickly. "What do you mean?"
"I mean that the depth of your intuition is only surpassed by the shallowness of your
     experience."
"You are very rude!" And Elisabeth drew up her head rather haughtily.
"Forgive me; I didn't mean to be; but I was overcome by the wonder of how complex you are—how
     wise on the one side, and how foolish upon the other; but experience is merely human and very
     attainable, while intuition is divine and given to few. And I was overcome by another thought;
     may I tell you what that was?"
"Yes; of course you may."
"You won't be angry?"
"No."
"You will remember how we played together as children round the temple of Philæ, and let my
     prehistoric memories of you be my excuse?"
"Yes."
"I was overcome by the thought of how glorious it would be to teach you all the things you
     don't
      know, and how delightful it would be to see you learn them."
"Let us go into the next room," said Elisabeth, rising from her seat; "I see Lady
     Silverhampton nodding to me, and I must go and speak to her."
Cecil Farquhar bent his six-foot-one down to her five-foot-five. "Are you angry with me?" he
     whispered.
"I don't know; I think I am."
"But you will let me come and see you, so that you may forgive me, won't you?"
"You don't deserve it."
"Of course I don't; I shouldn't want it if I did. The things we deserve are as unpleasant as
     our doctor's prescriptions. Please let me come—because we knew each other all those centuries
     ago, and I haven't forgotten you."
"Very well, then. You'll find my address in the Red Book, and I'm always at home on Sunday
     afternoons."
As Elisabeth was whirled away into a vortex of gay and well-dressed people, Farquhar watched
     her for a moment. "She is an attractive woman," he said to himself, "though she is not as
     good-looking as I expected. But there's charm about her, and breeding; and they say she has an
     enormous fortune. She is certainly worth cultivating."
Farquhar cultivated the distinguished Miss Farringdon assiduously, and the friendship between
     them grew apace. Each had a certain attraction for the other; and, in addition, they enjoyed
     that wonderful freemasonry which exists among all followers of the same craft, and welds these
     together in a bond almost as strong as the bond of relationship. The artist in Farquhar was of
     far finer fibre than the man,
      as is sometimes the case with complex natures; so that one side of him gave
     expression to thoughts which the other side of him was incapable of comprehending. He did not
     consciously pretend that he was better than he was, and he really believed the truths which he
     preached; but when the gods serve their nectar in earthen vessels, the vessels are apt to get
     more credit than they deserve, and the gods less.
To Elisabeth, Cecil was extremely interesting; and she understood—better than most women
     would have done—the difference between himself and his art, and how the one must not be
     measured by the other. The artist attracted her greatly; she had so much sympathy with his ways
     of looking at life and of interpreting truth; as for the man, she had as yet come to no
     definite conclusion in her mind concerning him; it was not easy for mankind to fascinate
     Elisabeth Farringdon.
"I have come to see my mother-confessor," he said to her one Sunday afternoon, when he
     dropped in to find her alone, Grace Cobham having gone out to tea. "I have been behaving
     horribly all the week, and I want you to absolve me and help me to be better and nicer."
Elisabeth was the last woman to despise flattery of this sort; an appeal for help of any kind
     never found her indifferent.
"What have you been doing?" she asked gently.
"It isn't so much what I have been doing as what I have been feeling. I found myself actually
     liking Lady Silverhampton, simply because she is a countess; and I was positively rude to a man
     I know, called Edgar Ford, because he lives at the East End and dresses badly. What a
     falling-off since the days when
      you and I worshipped the gods together at Philæ, and before money and rank and
     railways and bicycles came into fashion! Help me to be as I was then, dear friend."
"How can I?"
"By simply being yourself and letting me watch you. I always feel good and ideal and
     unworldly when I am near you. Don't you know how dreadful it is to wish to do one thing and to
     want to do another, and to be torn asunder between the two?"
Elisabeth shook her head. "No; I have never felt like that. I can understand wanting to do
     different things at different times of one's life, but I can not comprehend how one person can
     want to do two opposing things at the same time."
"Oh! I can. I can imagine doing a thing, and despising one's self at the time for doing it,
     and yet not being able to help doing it."
"I have heard other people say that, and I can't understand it."
"Yet you are so complex; I should have thought you would," said Farquhar.
"Yes, I am complex; but not at the same moment. I have two distinct natures, but the two are
     never on the stage at once. I don't in the least know what St. Paul meant when he said that the
     evil he would not that he did. I can quite understand doing the evil on Tuesday morning that I
     would not on Monday afternoon; but I could never do anything and disapprove of it at the same
     minute."
"That is because you are so good—and so cold."
"Am I?"
"Yes, dear Miss Farringdon; and so amiable. You never do things in a temper."
     
"But I do; I really have got a temper of my own, though nowadays people seem to find
     difficulty in believing it. I have frequently done things in a temper before now; but as long
     as the temper lasts I am pleased that I have done them, and feel that I do well to be angry.
     When the temper is over, I sometimes think differently; but not till then. As I have told you
     before, my will is so strong that it and I are never at loggerheads with each other; it always
     rules me completely."
Farquhar sighed. "I wish I were as strong as you are; but I am not. And do you mean to tell
     me that there is no worldly side to you, either; no side that hankers after fleshpots, even
     while the artist within you is being fed with manna from heaven?"
"No; I don't think there is," Elisabeth replied slowly. "I really do not like people any the
     better for having money and titles and things like that, and it is no use pretending that I
     do."
"I do. I wish I didn't, but I can't help it. It is only you who can help me to look at life
     from the ideal point of view—you whose feet are still wet with the dew of Olympus, and in whom
     the Greek spirit is as fresh as it was three thousand years ago."
"Oh! I'm not as perfect as all that; far from it! I don't despise people for not having rank
     or wealth, since rank and wealth don't happen to be the things that interest me. But there are
     things that do interest me—genius and wit and culture and charm, for instance—and I am quite as
     hard on the people who lack these gifts, as ever you are on the impecunious nobodies. I confess
     I am often ashamed of myself when I realize how frightfully I look down upon stupid men and
     dull women, and how utterly indifferent I am as to what becomes of them. So I really am
      as great a snob as you are, though I wear my snobbery—like my rue—with a
     difference."
"Not a snob, dear lady—never a snob! There never existed a woman with less snobbery in her
     composition than you have. That you are impatient of the dull and unattractive, I admit; but so
     you ought to be—your own wit and charm give you the right to despise them."
"But they don't; that's where you make a mistake. It is as unjust to look down on a man for
     not making a joke as for not making a fortune. Though it isn't so much the people who don't
     make jokes that irritate me, as the people who make poor ones. Don't you know the
     sort?—would-be wits who quote a remark out of a bound Punch, and think they have been
     brilliant; and who tell an anecdote crusted with antiquity, which men learned at their mother's
     knees, and say that it actually happened to a friend of theirs the week before last."
"Oh! they are indeed terrible," agreed Cecil; "they dabble in inverted commas as Italians
     dabble in garlic."
"I never know whether to laugh at their laboured jokes or not. Of course, it is pretty
     manners to do so, be the wit never so stale; but on the other hand it encourages them in their
     evil habits, and seems to me as doubtful a form of hospitality as offering a brandy-and-soda to
     a confirmed drunkard."
"Dear friend, let us never try to be funny!"
"Amen! And, above all things, let us flee from humorous recitations," added Elisabeth. "There
     are few things in the world more heart-rending than a humorous recitation—with action. As for
     me, it unmans me completely, and I quietly weep in a remote corner of the room until the
     carriage comes to take
      me home. Therefore, I avoid such; as no woman's eyelashes will stand a long
     course of humorous recitation without being the worse for wear."
"It seems to me after all," Cecil remarked, "that the evil that you would not, that you do,
     like St. Paul and myself and sundry others, if you despise stupid people, and know that you
     oughtn't to despise them, at the same time."
"I know I oughtn't to despise them, but I never said I didn't want to despise them—that's
     just the difference. As a matter of fact, I enjoy despising them; that is where I am really so
     horrid. I hide it from them, because I hate hurting people's feelings; and I say 'How very
     interesting!' out of sheer good manners when they talk to me respectively about their cooks if
     they are women, and their digestions if they are men; but all the time I am inwardly lifting up
     my eyes, and patting myself on the back, and thanking heaven that I am not as they are, and
     generally out-Phariseeing the veriest Pharisee that ever breathed."
"It is wonderful how the word 'cook' will wake into animation the most phlegmatic of
     women!"
"If they are married," added Elisabeth; "not unless. I often think when I go up into the
     drawing-room at a dinner-party, I will just say the word 'cook' to find out which of the women
     are married and which single. I'm certain I should know at once, from the expression the magic
     word brought to their respective faces. It is only when you have a husband that you regard the
     cook as the ruling power in life for good or evil."
There was a pause while the footman brought in tea and Elisabeth poured it out; then Farquhar
     said suddenly
     —
"I feel a different man from the one that rang at your door-bell some twenty minutes ago. The
     worldliness has slipped from me like a cast-off shell; now I experience a democratic
     indifference to my Lady Silverhampton, and a brotherly affection for Mr. Edgar Ford. And this
     is all your doing!"
"I don't see how that can be," laughed Elisabeth; "seeing that Lady Silverhampton is a friend
     of mine, and I have never heard of Mr. Edgar Ford."
"But it is; it is your own unconscious influence upon me. Miss Farringdon, you don't know
     what you have been and what you are to me! It is only since I knew you that I have realized how
     little all outer things really matter, and how much inner ones do; and how it is a question of
     no moment who a man is, compared with what a man is. And you will go on teaching me, won't you,
     and letting me sit at your feet, until the man in me is always what now the artist in me is
     sometimes?"
"I shall like to help you if I can; I am always longing to help people, and yet so few people
     ever seem to want my help." And Elisabeth's eyes grew sad.
"I want it—more than I want anything in the world," replied Cecil; and he really meant it,
     for the artist in him was uppermost just then.
"Then you shall have it."
"Thank you—thank you more than I can ever say."
After a moment's silence Elisabeth asked—
"Are you going to Lady Silverhampton's picnic on the river to-morrow?"
"Yes; I accepted because I thought I should be sure to meet you," replied Cecil, who would
     have
      accepted the invitation of a countess if it had been to meet his bitterest
     foe.
"Then your forethought will be rewarded, for I am going, too," Elisabeth said.
And then other callers were shown in, and the conversation was brought to an abrupt
     conclusion; but it left behind it a pleasant taste in the minds of both the principals.
     
