<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Devotee, by Mary
      Cholmondeley.</title><author>Cholmondeley, Mary (1859-1925).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1897</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHAPTER II.

“But we are tired. At Life's crude hands
We ask no gift she understands;
But kneel to him she hates to crave
The absolution of the grave.”
Mathilde Blind.

The laws of attraction remain a mystery. Their results we see. Glimpses of their workings can
     occasionally be caught in their broken fragments. But the curve by which the circle may be
     drawn is nowhere to be found among those fragments. The first cause we cannot see. With
     sacrilegious hands we may rend the veil of its temple in the sacred name of truth, but
      we shall find nothing in its holy of holies save the bloodstains of generations of
     sacrifices on its empty altar, and the place where the ark has been.
Youth, beauty, wit—all these attract; but they are only the momentary disciples of a great
     master, and their power is from him. In his name they perform a few works, and cast out a few
     small devils.
But now and again a nature appears in our midst in the presence of which youth sinks its
     voice, and beauty pales and hangs its head, and wit bends its knee in reverence.
What talisman had Mr. Loftus brought into the world with him that disinterested love and
     devotion should with one exception have followed him all the days of his life? But whether it
     had been given to him at his birth, or he had found it alone
      upon the hillside, or Sorrow, who has many treasures in her lap, but will never
     give them to those who turn from her, gave it to him when he kissed her hand—however this may
     have been, he had it.
He had gone through his difficult life little realizing how much he owed to the impersonal
     love and respect which he inspired in men and women, as a beautiful woman seldom realizes how
     life has been coloured for her by the colour of her hair and eyes.
His poetic exalted nature, with its tender affections, its deep passions, with its refinement
     and its delicacy of feeling, too sensitive to bear contact with this rough world, and yet not
     content to dwell apart from awkward fellow-creatures who wounded when they touched it, had
     leaned twice on the frail reed of personal love,
      and twice it had pierced his hand. After the second time he withdrew his scarred
     hand in silence, and journeyed on with it in his bosom.
In the days of his youth he had been swept into the vortex of a deep passion which for the
     time engulfed his whole being. His early marriage and his romantic love, and his young wife's
     desertion of him, consumed like a rolling prairie-fire his early life. But he had emerged with
     the mark of fire upon him, and had taken up life again, and had made a career for himself in
     the world of politics.
And he had reached middle age, he was a grave man with gray in his hair, before love came to
     him the second time. How he fared the second time no man knew; but afterwards the love of woman,
      deep-rooted though it was, died down in Mr. Loftus's heart. He went quietly on his
     way, but the way wearied him. He confided in no one, for he was burdened with many confidences,
     and those on whom others lean can seldom find a hand to lean on in their greater weakness and
     their deeper troubles.
But his physical health wavered. At last his heart became affected, and after a few warnings
     he was obliged to give up public life. He ceased to be in authority, but he remained an
     authority, and so lived patiently on from year to year on the verge of the grave, aware that at
     any moment the next step might be across its brink.
He had spoken the bare truth to Sibyl when he told her that his life hung by a thread. That
     this is so with all human
      life is a truism to which we all agree, but which none of us believe. But in his
     case the sword of Damocles was visible in the air above him. He never took for granted, if he
     went out for a walk, that he should return; and on this particular May afternoon, as he looked
     out from a friend's house in Park Lane across the street to the twinkle of green and the
     coloured bands of hyacinths beyond the railings, he locked his writing-table drawer from force
     of long habit, and burned the letters he had just read as carefully as if he were going on a
     long journey, instead of a short stroll across the park to Lady Pierpoint's house in
     Kensington.
It was a heavy trouble that he had just locked into the writing-table drawer—nothing less
     than the sale of Wilderleigh, which he and Doll, after much laying
      together of the gray head and the brown one, had both come to the conclusion could
     not be staved off any longer. For the newly-imposed death-duties and the increasing pressure of
     taxation on land, in the teeth of increasing agricultural depression, had been the death-blow
     of Wilderleigh, as of so many other quiet country homes and their owners. The new aristocracy
     of the ironmaster and the cheesemonger and the brewer had come to the birth, and the old must
     give way before the power of their money. Mr. Loftus accepted the inevitable, and Wilderleigh
     was to be sold.
He did not know for certain where Lady Pierpoint was to be found, but he would try the little
     house in Kensington. He had seen her driving alone the previous day, and he knew that she had
      quite recently returned with her daughter and niece from Egypt, where they had
     spent the winter months. Something in the glimpse of her passing face yesterday had awakened in
     him a vague suspicion that she was in trouble. She looked older and grayer, and why was she
     alone?
He took up his hat and, entering the Park, struck across the grass in the direction of the
     Albert Memorial, blinking in all its gilt in the afternoon sun. The blent green and gray of a
     May day in London had translated the prose of the Park into poetry. Here in the very heart of
     the vast machine, Spring had ventured to alight for a moment, undisturbed by the distant roar
     of dusty struggling life all round her. The new leaves on the smoke-black branches of the trees
     were for a moment green as those unfolding in
      country lanes. Smoke-black among the silvery grass men lay strewn in the sunshine,
     looking like cast-off rags flung down, outworn by humanity, whose great pulse was throbbing so
     near at hand. Across the tender beauty of the young year fell the shadow of crime and
     exhaustion, and “the every-day tragedy of the cheapness of man.”
The shadow fell on Mr. Loftus's mind, and he had well-nigh reached Lady Pierpoint's door
     before his thoughts returned to her and to her niece, Sibyl Carruthers.
“Pretty, delicate, impulsive creature, so generous, so ignorant, so full of the ephemeral
     enthusiasms of youth which have no staying power. The real enthusiasms of life are made of
     sterner stuff than she, poor child! guesses. What will become of her? What man in the future
      will take her ardent, fragile devotion, and hold it without breaking it, and bask
     in the green springtide of her love without desecrating it, like those poor outcasts in the
     Park?”
Lady Pierpoint was at home, and he was presently ushered into the drawing-room, where she was
     sitting in her walking things. The room was without flowers, without books, without any of the
     small landmarks of occupation. It had evidently been arranged only for the briefest stay, and
     had as little welcome in it as a narrow mind.
Lady Pierpoint, pouring tea out of a metal teapot into an enormous teacup, looked also as if
     she were on the point of departure.
She greeted him cordially, and sent for another cup. A further glance showed
      him that she looked worn and harassed. Her cheerful motherly face was beginning to
     droop like a mastiff's at the corners of the mouth, in the manner in which anxiety cruelly
     writes itself on plump middle-aged faces.
“I am not really visible,” she said, smiling, as she handed him the large cup which matched
     her own. “I cannot bring forth butter in a lordly dish, as you perceive, for everything is
     locked up. I am here only for two days, cook-hunting.”
Mr. Loftus had intended to ask after Sibyl, but he asked after Peggy instead.
“She is quite well,” said Lady Pierpoint. “She is always well, I am thankful to say. I have
     another Peggy coming out this year—Molly—perhaps you remember her; but how to bring her to
     London this season I don't know. I have hardly seen
      anything of her all last winter, poor child! as I was in Egypt with Sibyl. I have
     only just returned to England.”
“And Miss Carruthers?” he said, examining his metal teaspoon; “will not she be in London with
     you this season, with your own daughters?”
“No,” said Lady Pierpoint, looking narrowly at him; “Sibyl is ill. I have been very anxious
     about her all the winter. I greatly fear that she will sink into a decline. You know, her
     sister died of consumption a year or two ago.”
Mr. Loftus looked blankly at Lady Pierpoint.
“Sibyl!” he said—“ill? Oh, surely there is some mistake? What do the doctors say?”
“They all say the same thing,” said Lady Pierpoint, her lips quivering. “She had
      a cough last winter, and she is naturally delicate, but there is no actual disease
     as yet. But if she continues in this morbid state of health—if she goes on as she is at
     present—they say it will end in that.”
Mr. Loftus was silent.
Lady Pierpoint looked at his unconscious, saddened, world-weary face, and clasped her hands
     tightly together.
“Mr. Loftus,” she said, “I am going to put a great strain on our friendship, and if I lose
     it, I must lose it. I have been thinking of writing to you, but I could not. I had thought of
     asking you to come and see me while I was alone here, but my courage failed me. But now that
     you have come by what is called chance, I dare not be a coward any longer. Sibyl has told me of
     what passed last summer between you and her.”

A faint colour came into Mr. Loftus's pale face. He kept his eyes on the floor.
“I think,” he said gently, but with a touch of reserve in his voice which did not escape his
     companion, “we must both forget that as completely as she herself has probably already
     forgotten it.”
“She has not forgotten it,” said Lady Pierpoint, ignoring, though with a pang, his evident
     wish to dismiss the subject. “It is that which is causing her ill-health. She can think of
     nothing else. Some of us,” she said sadly, “are so constituted that we can bear trouble and
     disappointment—others can't. This poor child, who has cried for the moon, is not mentally and
     physically strong enough to bear the disappointment of being denied it. And the doctors say
     that her life is dependent on her happiness.”

Mr. Loftus rose, and paced up and down the room. She dared not look at him.
Presently he stopped, and, with his face turned away, said with emotion:
“But the moon is a dreary place if it is seen as it is, with its extinct volcanoes and its
     ice-fields. Nothing lives there. The fire in it is burnt out, and there is snow over the ashes.
     It is only in the eyes of a child that the moon is bright. We elders know that it is dark and
     desolate.”
Lady Pierpoint was awed. She had known Mr. Loftus for twenty years. He had been kind to her
     in the early years of her widowhood, and in the later ones had helped on her boys by his
     influence in high quarters. She had often told him of her difficulties, but she had never till
     now heard him speak of himself.

Her great admiration for him, which was of a humbler kind than Sibyl's, led her to say: “It
     is not only in the child's eyes that the moon is bright.”
She might have added with truth that in her own middle-aged eyes it was bright, too.
“I greatly honoured you when Sibyl told me about it,” she continued, after a long pause. “It
     is because I have entire trust in you that I have told you the truth about this poor child, who
     is as dear to me as my own, though I hope my own will face life more bravely. Should you, after
     reflection, feel able to do her this—this—great kindness, I hope you will come and stay with us
     at Abergower for Whitsuntide. But—I shall not expect you, and I shall not mention to anyone
     that I have asked you.”

She rose and held out her hand. She looked tired.
He held it a moment, and she endeavoured to read the grave, inscrutable glance that met hers,
     but she could not.
“Thank you,” he said, and went away.
“How dare she think of him?” said Lady Pierpoint to herself.

</div></body></text></TEI>