
CHAPTER II.
Yes, the “Sens Commun” was a success: it had made a sensation at starting; the sensation was
      on the increase. It is difficult for an Englishman to comprehend the full influence of a
      successful journal at Paris; the station—political, literary, social—which it confers on the
      contributors who effect the success. M. Lebeau had shown much more sagacity in selecting
      Gustave Rameau for the nominal editor than Savarin supposed or my reader might detect. In the
      first place, Gustave himself, with all his defects of information and solidity of intellect,
      was not without real genius,—and a sort of genius that when kept in restraint, and its field
      confined to sentiment or sarcasm, was in unison with the temper of the day; in the second
      place, it was only through Gustave that Lebeau could have got at Savarin, and the names which
      that brilliant writer had secured at the outset would have sufficed to draw attention to the
      earliest numbers of the “Sens Commun,” despite a title which did not seem alluring. But these
      names alone could not have sufficed to circulate the new journal to the extent it had already
      reached. This was due to the curiosity excited by leading articles of a style new to the
      Parisian public, and of which the authorship defied conjecture. They were signed Pierre
      Firmin,—supposed to be a nom de plume, as, that name was utterly unknown in the world of
      letters. They affected the tone of an impartial observer; they neither espoused nor attacked
      any particular party; they laid down no abstract doctrines of government. But somehow or
      other, in language terse yet familiar, sometimes careless yet never vulgar, they expressed a
      prevailing sentiment of uneasy discontent, a foreboding of some destined change in things
      established, without defining the nature of such change, without saying whether it would be
      for good or for evil. In his criticisms upon individuals, the writer was guarded and
      moderate—the keenest-eyed censor of the press could not have found a pretext for interference
      with expression of opinions so polite. Of the Emperor these articles spoke little, but that
      little was not disrespectful; yet, day after day, the articles contributed to sap the Empire.
      All malcontents of every shade comprehended, as by a secret of freemasonry, that in this
      journal they had an ally. Against religion not a word was uttered, yet the enemies of religion
      bought that journal; still, the friends of religion bought it too, for those articles treated
      with irony the philosophers on paper who thought that their contradictory crotchets could fuse
      themselves into any single Utopia, or that any social edifice, hurriedly run up by the crazy
      few, could become a permanent habitation for the turbulent many, without the clamps of a
      creed.
The tone of these articles always corresponded with the title of the
      journal,—“Common-sense.” It was to common-sense that it appealed,—appealed in the utterance of
      a man who disdained the subtle theories, the vehement declamation, the credulous beliefs, or
      the inflated bombast, which constitute so large a portion of the Parisian press. The articles
      rather resembled certain organs of the English press, which profess to be blinded by no
      enthusiasm for anybody or anything, which find their sale in that sympathy with ill-nature to
      which Huet ascribes the popularity of Tacitus, and, always quietly undermining institutions
      with a covert sneer, never pretend to a spirit of imagination so at variance with common-sense
      as a conjecture how the institutions should be rebuilt or replaced.
Well, somehow or other the journal, as I was saying, hit the taste of the Parisian public.
      It intimated, with the easy grace of an unpremeditated agreeable talker, that French society
      in all its classes was rotten; and each class was willing to believe that all the others were
      rotten, and agreed that unless the others were reformed, there was something very unsound in
      itself.
The ball at the Duchesse de Tarascon’s was a brilliant event. The summer was far advanced;
      many of the Parisian holiday-makers had returned to the capital, but the season had not
      commenced, and a ball at that time of year was a very unwonted event. But there was a special
      occasion for this fete,—a marriage between a niece of the Duchesse and the son of a great
      official in high favour at the Imperial Court.
The dinner at Louvier’s broke up early, and the music for the second waltz was sounding when
      Enguerrand, Alain, and the Vicomte de Mauleon ascended the stairs. Raoul did not accompany
      them; he went very rarely to any balls,—never to one given by an Imperialist, however nearly
      related to him the Imperialist might be. But in the sweet indulgence of his good-nature, he
      had no blame for those who did go,—not for Enguerrand, still less, of course, for Alain.
Something too might well here be said as to his feeling towards Victor de Mauleon. He had
      joined in the family acquittal of that kinsman as to the grave charge of the jewels; the
      proofs of innocence thereon seemed to him unequivocal and decisive, therefore he had called on
      the Vicomte and acquiesced in all formal civilities shown to him. But such acts of justice to
      a fellow-gentilhomme and a kinsman duly performed, he desired to see as little as possible of
      the Vicomte de Mauleon. He reasoned thus: “Of every charge which society made against this man
      he is guiltless; but of all the claims to admiration which society accorded to him before it
      erroneously condemned, there are none which make me covet his friendship, or suffice to dispel
      doubts as to what he may be when society once more receives him. And the man is so captivating
      that I should dread his influence over myself did I see much of him.”
Raoul kept his reasonings to himself, for he had that sort of charity which indisposes an
      amiable man to be severe on bygone offences. In the eyes of Enguerrand and Alain, and such
      young votaries of the mode as they could influence, Victor de Mauleon assumed almost heroic
      proportions. In the affair which had inflicted on him a calumny so odious, it was clear that
      he had acted with chivalrous delicacy of honour. And the turbulence and recklessness of his
      earlier years, redeemed as they were, in the traditions of his contemporaries, by courage and
      generosity, were not offences to which young Frenchmen are inclined to be harsh. All question
      as to the mode in which his life might have been passed during his long absence from the
      capital was merged in the respect due to the only facts known, and these were clearly proved
      in his pieces justificatives: First, that he had served under another name in the ranks of the
      army in Algiers; had distinguished himself there for signal valour, and received, with
      promotion, the decoration of the cross. His real name was known only to his colonel, and on
      quitting the service, the colonel placed in his hands a letter of warm eulogy on his conduct,
      and identifying him as Victor de Mauleon. Secondly, that in California he had saved a wealthy
      family from midnight murder, fighting single-handed against and overmastering three ruffians,
      and declining all other reward from those he had preserved than a written attestation of their
      gratitude. In all countries, valour ranks high in the list of virtues; in no country does it
      so absolve from vices as it does in France.
But as yet Victor de Mauleon’s vindication was only known by a few, and those belonging to
      the gayer circles of life. How he might be judged by the sober middle class, which constitutes
      the most important section of public opinion to a candidate for political trusts and
      distinctions, was another question.
The Duchesse stood at the door to receive her visitors. Duplessis was seated near the
      entrance, by the side of a distinguished member of the Imperial Government, with whom he was
      carrying on a whispered conversation. The eye of the financier, however, turned towards the
      doorway as Alain and Enguerrand entered, and passing over their familiar faces, fixed itself
      attentively on that of a mach older man whom Enguerrand was presenting to the Duchesse, and in
      whom Duplessis rightly divined the Vicomte de Mauleon. Certainly if no one could have
      recognized M. Lebeau in the stately personage who had visited Louvier, still less could one
      who had heard of the wild feats of the roi des viveurs in his youth reconcile belief in such
      tales with the quiet modesty of mien which distinguished the cavalier now replying, with
      bended head and subdued accents, to the courteous welcome of the brilliant hostess. But for
      such difference in attributes between the past and the present De Mauleon, Duplessis had been
      prepared by the conversation at the Maison Doree. And now, as the Vicomte, yielding his place
      by the Duchesse to some new-comer, glided on, and, leaning against a column, contemplated the
      gay scene before him with that expression of countenance, half sarcastic, half mournful, with
      which men regard, after long estrangement, the scenes of departed joys, Duplessis felt that no
      change in that man had impaired the force of character which had made him the hero of reckless
      coevals. Though wearing no beard, not even a mustache, there was something emphatically
      masculine in the contour of the close-shaven cheek and resolute jaw; in a forehead broad at
      the temples, and protuberant in those organs over the eyebrows which are said to be
      significant of quick perception and ready action; in the lips, when in repose compressed,
      perhaps somewhat stern in their expression, but pliant and mobile when speaking, and
      wonderfully fascinating when they smiled. Altogether, about this Victor de Mauleon there was a
      nameless distinction, apart from that of conventional elegance. You would have said, “That is
      a man of some marked individuality, an eminence of some kind in himself.” You would not be
      surprised to hear that he was a party-leader, a skilled diplomatist, a daring soldier, an
      adventurous traveller; but you would not guess him to be a student, an author, an artist.
While Duplessis thus observed the Vicomte de Mauleon, all the while seeming to lend an
      attentive ear to the whispered voice of the Minister by his side, Alain passed on into the
      ball-room. He was fresh enough to feel the exhilaration of the dance. Enguerrand (who had
      survived that excitement, and who habitually deserted any assembly at an early hour for the
      cigar and whist of his club) had made his way to De Mauleon, and there stationed himself. The
      lion of one generation has always a mixed feeling of curiosity and respect for the lion of a
      generation before him, and the young Vandemar had conceived a strong and almost an
      affectionate interest in this discrowned king of that realm in fashion which, once lost, is
      never to be regained; for it is only Youth that can hold its sceptre and command its
      subjects.
“In this crowd, Vicomte,” said Enguerrand, “there must be many old acquaintances of
      yours?”
“Perhaps so, but as yet I have only seen new faces.”
As he thus spoke, a middle-aged man, decorated with the grand cross of the Legion and
      half-a-dozen foreign orders, lending his arm to a lady of the same age radiant in diamonds,
      passed by towards the ball-room, and in some sudden swerve of his person, occasioned by a
      pause of his companion to adjust her train, he accidentally brushed against De Mauleon, whom
      he had not before noticed. Turning round to apologize for his awkwardness, he encountered the
      full gaze of the Vicomte, started, changed countenance, and hurried on his companion.
“Do you not recognize his Excellency?” said Enguerrand, smiling. “His cannot be a new face
      to you.”
“Is it the Baron de Lacy?” asked De Mauleon.
“The Baron de Lacy, now Comte d’Epinay, ambassador at the Court of ——-, and, if report speak
      true, likely soon to exchange that post for the porte feuille of Minister.”
“He has got on in life since I saw him last, the little Baron. He was then my devoted
      imitator, and I was not proud of the imitation.”
“He has got on by always clinging to the skirts of some one stronger than himself,—to yours,
      I dare say, when, being a parvenu despite his usurped title of baron, he aspired to the entree
      into clubs and salons. The entree thus obtained, the rest followed easily; he became a
      millionaire through a wife’s dot, and an ambassador through the wife’s lover, who is a power
      in the State.”
“But he must have substance in himself. Empty bags can not be made to stand upright. Ah!
      unless I mistake, I see some one I knew better. Yon pale, thin man, also with the grand
      cross—surely that is Alfred Hennequin. Is he too a decorated Imperialist? I left him a
      socialistic Republican.”
“But, I presume, even then an eloquent avocat. He got into the Chamber, spoke well, defended
      the coup-d’etat. He has just been made Prefet of the great department of the a popular
      appointment. He bears a high character. Pray renew your acquaintance with him; he is coming
      this way.”
“Will so grave a dignitary renew acquaintance with me? I doubt it.”
But as De Mauleon said this, he moved from the column, and advanced towards the Prefet.
      Enguerrand followed him, and saw the Vicomte extend his hand to his old acquaintance.
The Prefet stared, and said, with frigid courtesy, “Pardon me,—some mistake.”
“Allow me, Monsieur Hennequin,” said Enguerrand, interposing, and wishing good-naturedly to
      save De Mauleon the awkwardness of introducing himself,—“allow me to reintroduce you to my
      kinsman, whom the lapse of years may well excuse you for forgetting, the Vicomte de
      Mauleon.”
Still the Prefet did not accept the hand. He bowed with formal ceremony, said, “I was not
      aware that Monsieur le Vicomte had returned to Paris,” and moving to the doorway, made his
      salutation to the hostess and disappeared.
“The insolent!” muttered Enguerrand.
“Hush!” said De Mauleon, quietly, “I can fight no more duels,—especially with a Prefet. But
      I own I am weak enough to feel hurt at such a reception from Hennequin, for he owed me some
      obligations,—small, perhaps, but still they were such as might have made me select him, rather
      than Louvier, as the vindicator of my name, had I known him to be so high placed. But a man
      who has raised himself into an authority may well be excused for forgetting a friend whose
      character needs defence. I forgive him.”
There was something pathetic in the Vicomte’s tone which touched Enguerrand’s warm if light
      heart. But De Mauleon did not allow him time to answer. He went on quickly through an opening
      in the gay crowd, which immediately closed behind him, and Enguerrand saw him no more that
      evening.
Duplessis ere this had quitted his seat by the Minister, drawn thence by a young and very
      pretty girl resigned to his charge by a cavalier with whom she had been dancing. She was the
      only daughter of Duplessis, and he valued her even more than the millions he had made at the
      Bourse. “The Princess,” she said, “has been swept off in the train of some German Royalty; so,
      petit pere, I must impose myself on thee.”
The Princess, a Russian of high rank, was the chaperon that evening of Mademoiselle Valerie
      Duplessis.
“And I suppose I must take thee back into the ballroom,” said the financier, smiling
      proudly, “and find thee partners.”
“I don’t want your aid for that, Monsieur; except this quadrille, my list is pretty well
      filled up.”
“And I hope the partners will be pleasant. Let me know who they are,” he whispered, as they
      threaded their way into the ball-room.
The girl glanced at her tablet.
“Well, the first on the list is milord somebody, with an unpronounceable English name.”
“Beau cavalier?”
“No; ugly, old too; thirty at least.”
Duplessis felt relieved. He did not wish his daughter to fall in love with an
      Englishman.
“And the next?”
“The next?” she said hesitatingly, and he observed that a soft blush accompanied the
      hesitation.
“Yes, the next. Not English too?”
“Oh, no; the Marquis de Rochebriant.”
“Ah! who presented him to thee?”
“Thy friend, petit pere, M. de Braze.”
Duplessis again glanced at his daughter’s face; it was bent over her bouquet.
“Is he ugly also?”
“Ugly!” exclaimed the girl, indignantly; “why, he is—” she checked herself and turned away
      her head.
Duplessis became thoughtful. He was glad that he had accompanied his child into the
      ball-room; he would stay there, and keep watch on her and Rochebriant also.
Up to that moment he had felt a dislike to Rochebriant. That young noble’s too obvious pride
      of race had nettled him, not the less that the financier himself was vain of his ancestry.
      Perhaps he still disliked Alain, but the dislike was now accompanied with a certain, not
      hostile, interest; and if he became connected with the race, the pride in it might grow
      contagious.
They had not been long in the ball-room before Alain came up to claim his promised partner.
      In saluting Duplessis, his manner was the same as usual, not more cordial, not less
      ceremoniously distant. A man so able as the financier cannot be without quick knowledge of the
      human heart.
“If disposed to fall in love with Valerie,” thought Duplessis, “he would have taken more
      pains to please her father. Well, thank heaven, there are better matches to be found for her
      than a noble without fortune and a Legitimist without career.”
In fact, Alain felt no more for Valerie than for any other pretty girl in the room. In
      talking with the Vicomte de Braze in the intervals of the dance, he had made some passing
      remark on her beauty. De Braze had said, “Yes, she is charming; I will present you,” and
      hastened to do so before Rochebriant even learned her name. So introduced, he could but invite
      her to give him her first disengaged dance, and when that was fixed, he had retired, without
      entering into conversation.
Now, as they took their places in the quadrille, he felt that effort of speech had become a
      duty, if not a pleasure; and of course, he began with the first commonplace which presented
      itself to his mind.
“Do you not think it a very pleasant ball, Mademoiselle?”
“Yes,” dropped, in almost inaudible reply, from Valerie’s rosy lips.
“And not over-crowded, as most balls are?”
Valerie’s lips again moved, but this time quite inaudibly. The obligations of the figure now
      caused a pause. Alain racked his brains and began,
“They tell me the last season was more than usually gay; of that I cannot judge, for it was
      well-nigh over when I came to Paris for the first time.”
Valerie looked up with a more animated expression than her childlike face had yet shown, and
      said, this time distinctly, “This is my first ball, Monsieur le Marquis.”
“One has only to look at Mademoiselle to divine that fact,” replied Alain, gallantly.
Again the conversation was interrupted by the dance; but the ice between the two was now
      broken; and when the quadrille was concluded, and Rochebriant led the fair Valerie back to her
      father’s side, she felt as if she had been listening to the music of the spheres, and that the
      music had now suddenly stopped. Alain, alas for her! was under no such pleasing illusion. Her
      talk had seemed to him artless indeed, but very insipid, compared with the brilliant
      conversation of the wedded Parisiennes with whom he more habitually danced; and it was with
      rather a sensation of relief that he made his parting bow, and receded into the crowd of
      bystanders.
Meanwhile De Mauleon had quitted the assemblage, walking slowly through the deserted streets
      towards his apartment. The civilities he had met at Louvier’s dinner-party, and the marked
      distinction paid to him by kinsmen of rank and position so unequivocal as Alain and
      Enguerrand, had softened his mood and cheered his spirits. He had begun to question himself
      whether a fair opening to his political ambition was really forbidden to him under the
      existent order of things, whether it necessitated the employment of such dangerous tools as
      those to which anger and despair had reconciled his intellect. But the pointed way in which he
      had been shunned or slighted by the two men who belonged to political life—two men who in
      youth had looked up to himself, and whose dazzling career of honours was identified with the
      Imperial system—reanimated his fiercer passions and his more perilous designs. The frigid
      accost of Hennequin more especially galled him; it wounded not only his pride but his heart;
      it had the venom of ingratitude, and it is the peculiar privilege of ingratitude to wound
      hearts that have learned to harden themselves to the hate or contempt of men to whom no
      services have been rendered. In some private affair concerning his property, De Mauleon had
      had occasion to consult Hennequin, then a rising young avocat. Out of that consultation a
      friendship had sprung up, despite the differing habits and social grades of the two men. One
      day, calling on Hennequin, he found him in a state of great nervous excitement. The avocat had
      received a public insult in the salon of a noble, to whom De Mauleon had introduced him, from
      a man who pretended to the hand of a young lady to whom Hennequin was attached, and indeed
      almost affianced. The man was a notorious spadassin,—a duellist little less renowned for skill
      in all weapons than De Mauleon himself. The affair had been such that Hennequin’s friends
      assured him he had no choice but to challenge this bravo. Hennequin, brave enough at the bar,
      was no hero before sword-point or pistol. He was utterly ignorant of the use of either weapon;
      his death in the encounter with an antagonist so formidable seemed to him certain, and life
      was so precious,—an honourable and distinguished career opening before him, marriage with the
      woman he loved. Still he had the Frenchman’s point of honour. He had been told that he must
      fight; well, then, he must. He asked De Mauleon to be one of his seconds, and in asking him,
      sank in his chair, covered his face with his hands, and burst into tears.
“Wait till to-morrow,” said De Mauleon; “take no step till then. Meanwhile, you are in my
      hands, and I answer for your honour.”
On leaving Hennequin, Victor sought the spadassin at the club of which they were both
      members, and contrived, without reference to Hennequin, to pick a quarrel with him. A
      challenge ensued; a duel with swords took place the next morning. De Mauleon disarmed and
      wounded his antagonist, not gravely, but sufficiently to terminate the encounter. He assisted
      to convey the wounded man to his apartment, and planted himself by his bedside, as if he were
      a friend.
“Why on earth did you fasten a quarrel on me?” asked the spadassin; “and why, having done
      so, did you spare my life; for your sword was at my heart when you shifted its point, and
      pierced my shoulder?”
“I will tell you, and in so doing, beg you to accept my friendship hereafter, on one
      condition. In the course of the day, write or dictate a few civil words of apology to M.
      Hennequin. Ma foi! every one will praise you for a generosity so becoming in a man who has
      given such proofs of courage and skill to an avocat who has never handled a sword nor fired a
      pistol.”
That same day De Mauleon remitted to Hennequin an apology for heated words freely retracted,
      which satisfied all his friends. For the service thus rendered by De Mauleon, Hennequin
      declared himself everlastingly indebted. In fact, he entirely owed to that friend his life,
      his marriage, his honour, his career.
“And now,” thought De Mauleon, “now, when he could so easily requite me,—now he will not
      even take my hand. Is human nature itself at war with me?”
