<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER XII.</head>
<p>We left Graham Vane slowly recovering from the attack of fever which had arrested his
      journey to Berlin in quest of the Count von Rudesheimn. He was, however, saved the prosecution
      of that journey, and his direction turned back to France by a German newspaper which informed
      him that the King of Prussia was at Rheims, and that the Count von Rudesheim was among the
      eminent personages gathered there around their sovereign. In conversing the same day with the
      kindly doctor who attended him, Graham ascertained that this German noble held a high command
      in the German armies, and bore a no less distinguished reputation as a wise political
      counsellor than he had earned as a military chief. As soon as he was able to travel, and
      indeed before the good doctor sanctioned his departure, Graham took his way to Rheims,
      uncertain, however, whether the Count would still be found there. I spare the details of his
      journey, interesting as they were. On reaching the famous and, in the eyes of Legitimists, the
      sacred city, the Englishman had no difficulty in ascertaining the house, not far from the
      cathedral, in which the Count von Rudesheim had taken his temporary abode. Walking towards it
      from the small hotel in which he had been lucky enough to find a room disengaged—slowly, for
      he was still feeble—he was struck by the quiet conduct of the German soldiery, and, save in
      their appearance, the peaceful aspect of the streets. Indeed, there was an air of festive
      gaiety about the place, as in an English town in which some popular regiment is quartered. The
      German soldiers thronged the shops, buying largely; lounged into the cafes; here and there
      attempted flirtations with the grisettes, who laughed at their French and blushed at their
      compliments; and in their good-humoured, somewhat bashful cheeriness, there was no trace of
      the insolence of conquest.</p>
<p>But as Graham neared the precincts of the cathedral his ear caught a grave and solemn music,
      which he at first supposed to come from within the building. But as he paused and looked
      round, he saw a group of the German military, on whose stalwart forms and fair manly earnest
      faces the setting sun cast its calm lingering rays. They were chanting, in voices not loud but
      deep, Luther’s majestic hymn:</p>
<p>“Nun danket alle Gott.” The chant awed even the ragged beggar boys who had followed the
      Englishman, as they followed any stranger, would have followed King William himself, whining
      for alms. “What a type of the difference between the two nations!” thought Graham; “the
      Marseillaise, and Luther’s Hymn!” While thus meditating and listening, a man in a general’s
      uniform came slowly out of the cathedral, with his hands clasped behind his back, and his head
      bent slightly downwards. He, too, paused on hearing the hymn; then unclasped his hand and
      beckoned to one of the officers, to whom approaching he whispered a word or two, and passed on
      towards the Episcopal palace. The hymn hushed, and the singers quietly dispersed. Graham
      divined rightly that the general had thought a hymn thanking the God of battles might wound
      the feelings of the inhabitants of the vanquished city—not, however, that any of them were
      likely to understand the language in which the thanks were uttered. Graham followed the
      measured steps of the general, whose hands were again clasped behind his back—the musing habit
      of Von Moltke, as it had been of Napoleon the First. Continuing his way, the Englishman soon
      reached the house in which the Count von Rudesheim was lodged, and, sending in his card, was
      admitted at once through an anteroom in which sate two young men, subaltern officers
      apparently employed in draughting maps, into the presence of the Count.</p>
<p>“Pardon me,” said Graham, after the first conventional salutation, “if I interrupt you for a
      moment or so in the midst of events so grave, on a matter that must seem to you very
      trivial.”</p>
<p>“Nay,” answered the Count, “there is nothing so trivial in this world but what there will be
      some one to whom it is important. Say how I can serve you.”</p>
<p>“I think, M. le Comte, that you once received in your household, as teacher or governess, a
      French lady, Madame Marigny.”</p>
<p>“Yes, I remember her well—a very handsome woman. My wife and daughter took great interest in
      her. She was married out of my house.”</p>
<p>“Exactly—and to whom?”</p>
<p>“An Italian of good birth, who was then employed by the Austrian Government in some minor
      post, and subsequently promoted to a better one in the Italian dominion, which then belonged
      to the house of Hapsburg, after which we lost sight of him and his wife.”</p>
<p>“An Italian—what was his name?”</p>
<p>“Ludovico Cicogna.”</p>
<p>“Cicogna!” exclaimed Graham, turning very pale. “Are you sure that was the name?”</p>
<p>“Certainly. He was a cadet of a very noble house, and disowned by relations too patriotic to
      forgive him for accepting employment under the Austrian Government.”</p>
<p>“Can you not give me the address of the place in Italy to which he was transferred on
      leaving Austria?”</p>
<p>“No; but if the information be necessary to you, it can be obtained easily at Milan, where
      the head of the family resides, or indeed in Vienna, through any ministerial bureau.”</p>
<p>“Pardon me one or two questions more. Had Madame Marigny any children by a former
      husband?”</p>
<p>“Not that I know of: I never heard so. Signor Cicogna was a widower, and had, if I remember
      right, children by his first wife, who was also a Frenchwoman. Before he obtained office in
      Austria, he resided, I believe, in France. I do not remember how many children he had by his
      first wife. I never saw them. Our acquaintance began at the baths of Toplitz, where he saw and
      fell violently in love with Madame Marigny. After their marriage, they went to his post, which
      was somewhere, I think, in the Tyrol. We saw no more of them; but my wife and daughter kept up
      a correspondence with the Signora Cicogna for a short time. It ceased altogether when she
      removed into Italy.”</p>
<p>“You do not even know if the Signora is still living?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Her husband, I am told, is dead.”</p>
<p>“Indeed! I am concerned to hear it. A good-looking, lively, clever man. I fear he must have
      lost all income when the Austrian dominions passed to the house of Savoy.”</p>
<p>“Many thanks for your information. I can detain you no longer,” said Graham, rising.</p>
<p>“Nay, I am not very busy at this moment; but I fear we Germans have plenty of work on our
      hands.”</p>
<p>“I had hoped that, now the French Emperor, against whom your king made war, was set aside,
      his Prussian majesty would make peace with the French people.”</p>
<p>“Most willingly would he do so if the French people would let him. But it must be through a
      French Government legally chosen by the people. And they have chosen none! A mob at Paris sets
      up a provisional administration, that commences by declaring that it will not give up ‘an inch
      of its territory nor a stone of its fortresses.’ No terms of peace can be made with such men
      holding such talk.” After a few words more over the state of public affairs,—in which Graham
      expressed the English side of affairs, which was all for generosity to the vanquished; and the
      Count argued much more ably on the German, which was all for security against the aggressions
      of a people that would not admit itself to be vanquished,—the short interview closed.</p>
<p>As Graham at night pursued his journey to Vienna, there came into his mind Isaura’s song of
      the Neapolitan fisherman. Had he, too, been blind to the image on the rock? Was it possible
      that all the while he had been resisting the impulse of his heart, until the discharge of the
      mission entrusted to him freed his choice and decided his fortunes, the very person of whom he
      was in search had been before him, then to be for ever won, lost to him now for ever? Could
      Isaura Cicogna be the child of Louise Duval by Richard King? She could not have been her child
      by Cicogna: the dates forbade that hypothesis. Isaura must have been five years old when
      Louise married the Italian. Arrived at Milan, Graham quickly ascertained that the post to
      which Ludovico Cicogna had been removed was in Verona, and that he had there died eight years
      ago. Nothing was to be learned as to his family or his circumstances at the time of his death.
      The people of whose history we know the least are the relations we refuse to acknowledge.
      Graham continued his journey to Verona. There he found on inquiry that the Cicognas had
      occupied an apartment in a house which stood at the outskirts of the town and had been since
      pulled down to make way for some public improvements. But his closest inquiries could gain him
      no satisfactory answers to the all-important questions as to Ludovico Cicogna’s family. His
      political alienation from the Italian cause, which was nowhere more ardently espoused than at
      Verona, had rendered him very unpopular. He visited at no Italian houses. Such society as he
      had was confined to the Austrian military within the Quadrilateral or at Venice, to which city
      he made frequent excursions: was said to lead there a free and gay life, very displeasing to
      the Signora, whom he left in Verona. She was but little seen, and faintly remembered as very
      handsome and proud-looking. Yes, there were children—a girl, and a boy several years younger
      than the girl; but whether she was the child of the Signora by a former marriage, or whether
      the Signora was only the child’s stepmother, no one could say. The usual clue, in such
      doubtful matters obtainable through servants, was here missing. The Cicognas had only kept two
      servants, and both were Austrian subjects, who had long left the country,—their very names
      forgotten.</p>
<p>Graham now called to mind the Englishman Selby, for whom Isaura had such grateful affection,
      as supplying to her the place of her father. This must have been the Englishman whom Louise
      Duval had married after Cicogna’s death. It would be no difficult task, surely, to ascertain
      where he had resided. Easy enough to ascertain all that Graham wanted to know from Isaura
      herself, if a letter could reach her. But, as he knew by the journals, Paris was now
      invested—cut off from all communication with the world beyond. Too irritable, anxious, and
      impatient to wait for the close of the siege, though he never suspected it could last so long
      as it did, he hastened to Venice, and there learned through the British consul that the late
      Mr. Selby was a learned antiquarian, an accomplished general scholar, a fanatico in music, a
      man of gentle temper though reserved manners; had at one time lived much at Venice: after his
      marriage with the Signora Cicogna he had taken up his abode near Florence. To Florence Graham
      now went. He found the villa on the skirts of Fiesole at which Mr. Selby had resided. The
      peasant who had officiated as gardener and shareholder in the profits of vines and figs, was
      still, with his wife, living on the place. Both man and wife remembered the Inglese well;
      spoke of him with great affection, of his wife with great dislike. They said her manners were
      very haughty, her temper very violent; that she led the Inglese a very unhappy life; that
      there were a girl and a boy, both hers by a former marriage; but when closely questioned
      whether they were sure that the girl was the Signora’s child by the former husband, or whether
      she was not the child of that husband by a former wife, they could not tell; they could only
      say that both were called by the same name—Cicogna; that the boy was the Signora’s
      favourite—that indeed she seemed wrapt up in him; that he died of a rapid decline a few months
      after Mr. Selby had hired the place, and that shortly after his death the Signora left the
      place and never returned to it; that it was little more than a year that she had lived with
      her husband before this final separation took place. The girl remained with Mr. Selby, who
      cherished and loved her as his own child. Her Christian name was Isaura, the boy’s Luigi. A
      few years later, Mr. Selby left the villa and went to Naples, where they heard he had died.
      They could give no information as to what had become of his wife: Since the death of her boy
      that lady had become very much changed—her spirits quite broken, no longer violent. She would
      sit alone and weep bitterly. The only person out of her family she would receive was the
      priest; till the boy’s death she had never seen the priest, nor been known to attend divine
      service.</p>
<p>“Was the priest living?”</p>
<p>“Oh, no; he had been dead two years. A most excellent man—a saint,” said the peasant’s
      wife.</p>
<p>“Good priests are like good women,” said the peasant, drily; “there are plenty of them, but
      they are all underground.”</p>
<p>On which remark the wife tried to box his ears. The contadino had become a freethinker since
      the accession of the house of Savoy. His wife remained a good Catholic. Said the peasant as,
      escaping from his wife, he walked into the high-road with Graham, “My belief, Eccellenza, is,
      that the priest did all the mischief.”</p>
<p>“What mischief?”</p>
<p>“Persuaded the Signora to leave her husband. The Inglese was not a Catholic. I heard the
      priest call him a heretic. And the padre, who, though not so bad as some of his cloth, was a
      meddling bigot, thought it perhaps best for her soul that it should part company with a
      heretic’s person. I can’t say for sure, but I think that was it. The padre seemed to triumph
      when the Signora was gone.” Graham mused. The peasant’s supposition was not improbable. A
      woman such as Louise Duval appeared to be—of vehement passions and ill-regulated mind—was just
      one of those who, in a moment of great sorrow, and estranged from the ordinary household
      affections, feel, though but imperfectly, the necessity of a religion, and, ever in extremes,
      pass at once from indifferentism into superstition.</p>
<p>Arrived at Naples, Graham heard little of Selby except as a literary recluse, whose only
      distraction from books was the operatic stage. But he heard much of Isaura; of the kindness
      which Madame de Grantmesnil had shown to her, when left by Selby’s death alone in the world;
      of the interest which the friendship and the warm eulogies of one so eminent as the great
      French writer had created for Isaura in the artistic circles; of the intense sensation her
      appearance, her voice, her universal genius, had made in that society, and the brilliant hopes
      of her subsequent career on the stage the cognoscenti had formed. No one knew anything of her
      mother; no one entertained a doubt that Isaura was by birth a Cicogna. Graham could not learn
      the present whereabouts of Madame de Grantmesnil. She had long left Naples, and had been last
      heard of at Genoa; was supposed to have returned to France a little before the war. In France
      she had no fixed residence.</p>
<p>The simplest mode of obtaining authentic information whether Isaura was the daughter of
      Ludovico Cicogna by his first wife—namely, by registration of her birth—failed him; because,
      as von Rudesheim had said, his first wife was a Frenchwoman. The children had been born
      somewhere in France, no one could even guess where. No one had ever seen the first wife, who
      had never appeared in Italy, nor had even heard what was her maiden name.</p>
<p>Graham, meanwhile, was not aware that Isaura was still in the besieged city, whether or not
      already married to Gustave Rameau; so large a number of the women had quitted Paris before the
      siege began, that he had reason to hope she was among them. He heard through an American that
      the Morleys had gone to England before the Prussian investment; perhaps Isaura had gone with
      them. He wrote to Mrs. Morley, inclosing his letter to the Minister of the United States at
      the Court of St. James’s, and while still at Naples received her answer. It was short, and
      malignantly bitter. “Both myself and Madame Savarin, backed by Signora Venosta, earnestly
      entreated Mademoiselle Cicogna to quit Paris, to accompany us to England. Her devotion to her
      affianced husband would not permit her to listen to us. It is only an Englishman who could
      suppose Isaura Cicogna to be one of those women who do not insist on sharing the perils of
      those they love. You ask whether she was the daughter of Ludovico Cicogna by his former
      marriage, or of his second wife by him. I cannot answer. I don’t even know whether Signor
      Cicogna ever had a former wife. Isaura Cicogna never spoke to me of her parents. Permit me to
      ask—what business is it of yours now? Is it the English pride that makes you wish to learn
      whether on both sides she is of noble family? How can that discovery alter your relations
      towards the affianced bride of another?”</p>
<p>On receipt of this letter, Graham quitted Naples, and shortly afterwards found himself at
      Versailles. He obtained permission to establish himself there, though the English were by no
      means popular. Thus near to Isaura, thus sternly separated from her, Graham awaited the close
      of the siege. Few among those at Versailles believed that the Parisians would endure it much
      longer. Surely they would capitulate before the bombardment, which the Germans themselves
      disliked to contemplate as a last resource, could commence.</p>
<p>In his own mind Graham was convinced that Isaura was the child of Richard King. It seemed to
      him probable that Louise Duval, unable to assign any real name to the daughter of the marriage
      she disowned,—neither the name borne by the repudiated husband, nor her own maiden
      name,—would, on taking her daughter to her new home, have induced Cicogna to give the child
      his name, or that after Cicogna’s death she herself had so designated the girl. A
      dispassionate confidant, could Graham have admitted any confidant whatever, might have
      suggested the more than equal probability that Isaura was Cicogna’s daughter by his former
      espousal. But then what could have become of Richard King’s child? To part with the fortune in
      his hands, to relinquish all the ambitious dreams which belonged to it, cost Graham Vane no
      pang: but he writhed with indignant grief when he thought that the wealth of Richard King’s
      heiress was to pass to the hands of Gustave Rameau,—that this was to be the end of his
      researches—this the result of the sacrifice his sense of honour imposed on him. And now that
      there was the probability that he must convey to Isaura this large inheritance, the practical
      difficulty of inventing some reason for such a donation, which he had, while at a distance
      made light of, became seriously apparent. How could he say to Isaura that he had L200,000. in
      trust for her, without naming any one so devising it? Still more, how constitute himself her
      guardian, so as to secure it to herself, independently of her husband? Perhaps Isaura was too
      infatuated with Rameau, or too romantically unselfish, to permit the fortune so mysteriously
      conveyed being exclusively appropriated to herself. And if she were already married to Rameau,
      and if he were armed with the right to inquire into the source of this fortune, how exposed to
      the risks of disclosure would become the secret Graham sought to conceal. Such a secret
      affecting the memory of the sacred dead, affixing a shame on the scutcheon of the living, in
      the irreverent hands of a Gustave Rameau,—it was too dreadful to contemplate such a hazard.
      And yet, if Isaura were the missing heiress, could Graham Vane admit any excuse for basely
      withholding from her, for coolly retaining to himself the wealth for which he was responsible?
      Yet, torturing as were these communings with himself, they were mild in their torture compared
      to the ever-growing anguish of the thought that in any case the only woman he had ever
      loved—ever could love,—who might but for his own scruples and prejudices have been the partner
      of his life, was perhaps now actually the wife of another, and, as such, in what terrible
      danger! Famine within the walls of the doomed city: without, the engines of death waiting for
      a signal. So near to her, and yet so far! So willing to die for her, if for her he could not
      live: and with all his devotion, all his intellect, all his wealth, so powerless!</p>
</div>