<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER V.</head>
<p>On quitting the sorry apartment of the false M. Lamb, Lebeau walked on with slow steps and
      bended head, like a man absorbed in thought. He threaded a labyrinth of obscure streets, no
      longer in the Faubourg Montmartre, and dived at last into one of the few courts which preserve
      the cachet of the moyen age untouched by the ruthless spirit of improvement which during the
      second empire has so altered the face of Paris. At the bottom of the court stood a large
      house, much dilapidated, but bearing the trace of former grandeur in pilasters and fretwork in
      the style of the Renaissance, and a defaced coat of arms, surmounted with a ducal coronet,
      over the doorway. The house had the aspect of desertion: many of the windows were broken;
      others were jealously closed with mouldering shutters. The door stood ajar; Lebeau pushed it
      open, and the action set in movement a bell within a porter’s lodge. The house, then, was not
      uninhabited; it retained the dignity of a concierge. A man with a large grizzled beard cut
      square, and holding a journal in his hand, emerged from the lodge, and moved his cap with a
      certain bluff and surly reverence on recognizing Lebeau.</p>
<p>“What! so early, citizen?”</p>
<p>“Is it too early?” said Lebeau, glancing at his watch. “So it is; I was not aware of the
      time. But I am tired with waiting; let me into the salon. I will wait for the rest; I shall
      not be sorry for a little repose.”</p>
<p>“Bon,” said the porter, sententiously; “while man reposes men advance.”</p>
<p>“A profound truth, citizen Le Roux; though if they advance on a reposing foe, they have
      blundering leaders unless they march through unguarded by-paths and with noiseless tread.”</p>
<p>Following the porter up a dingy broad staircase, Lebeau was admitted into a large room, void
      of all other furniture than a table, two benches at its sides, and a fauteuil at its head. On
      the mantelpiece there was a huge clock, and some iron sconces were fixed on the panelled
      walls.</p>
<p>Lebeau flung himself, with a wearied air, into the fauteuil. The porter looked at him with a
      kindly expression. He had a liking to Lebeau, whom he had served in his proper profession of
      messenger or commissionnaire before being placed by that courteous employer in the easy post
      he now held. Lebeau, indeed, had the art, when he pleased, of charming inferiors; his
      knowledge of mankind allowed him to distinguish peculiarities in each individual, and flatter
      the amour propre by deference to such eccentricities. Marc le Roux, the roughest of “red
      caps,” had a wife of whom he was very proud. He would have called the empress Citoyenne
      Eugenie, but he always spoke of his wife as Madame. Lebeau won his heart by always asking
      after Madame.</p>
<p>“You look tired, citizen,” said the porter; “let me bring you a glass of wine.”</p>
<p>“Thank you, mon ami, no. Perhaps later, if I have time, after we break up, to pay my
      respects to Madame.”</p>
<p>The porter smiled, bowed, and retired muttering, “Nom d’un petit bonhomme; il n’y a rien de
      tel que les belles manieres.”</p>
<p>Left alone, Lebeau leaned his elbow on the table, resting his chin on his hand, and gazing
      into the dim space,—for it was now, indeed, night, and little light came through the grimy
      panes of the one window left unclosed by shutters. He was musing deeply. This man was, in
      much, an enigma to himself. Was he seeking to unriddle it? A strange compound of contradictory
      elements. In his stormy youth there had been lightning-like flashes of good instincts, of
      irregular honour, of inconsistent generosity,—a puissant wild nature, with strong passions of
      love and of hate, without fear, but not without shame. In other forms of society that love of
      applause which had made him seek and exult in the notoriety which he mistook for fame might
      have settled down into some solid and useful ambition. He might have become great in the
      world’s eye, for at the service of his desires there were no ordinary talents. Though too true
      a Parisian to be a severe student, still, on the whole, he had acquired much general
      information, partly from books, partly from varied commerce with mankind. He had the gift,
      both by tongue and by pen, of expressing himself with force and warmth; time and necessity had
      improved that gift. Coveting, during his brief career of fashion, the distinctions which
      necessitate lavish expenditure, he had been the most reckless of spendthrifts; but the
      neediness which follows waste had never destroyed his original sense of personal honour.
      Certainly Victor de Mauleon was not, at the date of his fall, a man to whom the thought of
      accepting, much less of stealing, the jewels of a woman who loved him could have occurred as a
      possible question of casuistry between honour and temptation. Nor could that sort of question
      have, throughout the sternest trials or the humblest callings to which his after-life had been
      subjected, forced admission into his brain. He was one of those men, perhaps the most terrible
      though unconscious criminals, who are the offsprings produced by intellectual power and
      egotistical ambition. If you had offered to Victor de Mauleon the crown of the Caesars, on
      condition of his doing one of those base things which “a gentleman” cannot do, pick a pocket,
      cheat at cards,—Victor de Mauleon would have refused the crown. He would not have refused on
      account of any laws of morality affecting the foundations of the social system, but from the
      pride of his own personality. “I, Victor de Mauleon! I pick a pocket! I cheat at cards! I!”
      But when something incalculably worse for the interests of society than picking a pocket or
      cheating at cards was concerned; when for the sake either of private ambition or political
      experiment hitherto untested, and therefore very doubtful, the peace and order and happiness
      of millions might be exposed to the release of the most savage passions, rushing on
      revolutionary madness or civil massacre, then this French dare-devil would have been just as
      unscrupulous as any English philosopher whom a metropolitan borough might elect as its
      representative. The system of the empire was in the way of Victor de Mauleon,—in the way of
      his private ambition, in the way of his political dogmas; and therefore it must be destroyed,
      no matter what nor whom it crushed beneath its ruins. He was one of those plotters of
      revolutions not uncommon in democracies, ancient and modern, who invoke popular agencies with
      the less scruple because they have a supreme contempt for the populace. A man with mental
      powers equal to De Mauleon’s, and who sincerely loves the people and respects the grandeur of
      aspiration with which, in the great upheaving of their masses, they so often contrast the
      irrational credulities of their ignorance and the blind fury of their wrath, is always
      exceedingly loath to pass the terrible gulf that divides reform from revolution. He knows how
      rarely it happens that genuine liberty is not disarmed in the passage, and what sufferings
      must be undergone by those who live by their labour during the dismal intervals between the
      sudden destruction of one form of society and the gradual settlement of another. Such a man,
      however, has no type in a Victor de Mauleon. The circumstances of his life had placed this
      strong nature at war with society, and corrupted into misanthropy affections that had once
      been ardent. That misanthropy made his ambition more intense, because it increased his scorn
      for the human instruments it employed.</p>
<p>Victor de Mauleon knew that however innocent of the charges that had so long darkened his
      name, and however—thanks to his rank, his manners, his savoir vivre, the aid of Louvier’s
      countenance and the support of his own high-born connections—he might restore himself to his
      rightful grade in private life, the higher prizes in public life would scarcely be within
      reach, to a man of his antecedents and stinted means, in the existent form and conditions of
      established political order. Perforce, the aristocrat must make himself democrat if he would
      become a political chief. Could he assist in turning upside down the actual state of things,
      he trusted to his individual force of character to find himself among the uppermost in the
      general bouleversement. And in the first stage of popular revolution the mob has no greater
      darling than the noble who deserts his order, though in the second stage it may guillotine him
      at the denunciation of his cobbler. A mind so sanguine and so audacious as that of Victor de
      Mauleon never thinks of the second step if it sees a way to the first.</p>
</div>