
CHAPTER III.
But in that small assembly there were two who did not attract the notice of Duplessis or of
      the lady of the Imperial Court. While the Prince —— and the placid Looker-on were engaged at a
      contest of ecarte, with the lively Venosta, for the gallery, interposing criticisms and
      admonitions, Isaura was listlessly turning over a collection of photographs, strewed on a
      table that stood near to an open window in the remoter angle of the room, communicating with a
      long and wide balcony filled partially with flowers and overlooking the Champs Elysees, softly
      lit up by the innumerable summer stars. Suddenly a whisper, the command of which she could not
      resist, thrilled through her ear, and sent the blood rushing back to her heart.
“Do you remember that evening at Enghien? how I said that our imagination could not carry us
      beyond the question whether we two should be gazing together that night twelve months on that
      star which each of us had singled out from the hosts of heaven? That was the 8th of July. It
      is the 8th of July once more. Come and seek for our chosen star—come. I have something to say,
      which say I must. Come.”
Mechanically, as it were,—mechanically, as they tell us the Somnambulist obeys the
      Mesmeriser,—Isaura obeyed that summons. In a kind of dreamy submission she followed his steps,
      and found herself on the balcony, flowers around her and stars above, by the side of the man
      who had been to her that being ever surrounded by flowers and lighted by stars,—the ideal of
      Romance to the heart of virgin Woman.
“Isaura,” said the Englishman, softly. At the sound of her own name for the first time heard
      from those lips, every nerve in her frame quivered. “Isaura, I have tried to live without you.
      I cannot. You are all in all to me: without you it seems to me as if earth had no flowers, and
      even heaven had withdrawn its stars. Are there differences between us, differences of taste,
      of sentiments, of habits, of thought? Only let me hope that you can love me a tenth part so
      much as I love you, and such differences cease to be discord. Love harmonises all sounds,
      blends all colours into its own divine oneness of heart and soul. Look up! is not the star
      which this time last year invited our gaze above, is it not still there? Does it not still
      invite our gaze? Isaura, speak!”
“Hush, hush, hush,”—the girl could say no more, but she recoiled from his side.
The recoil did not wound him: there was no hate in it. He advanced, he caught her hand, and
      continued, in one of those voices which become so musical in summer nights under starry
      skies:
“Isaura, there is one name which I can never utter without a reverence due to the religion
      which binds earth to heaven—a name which to man should be the symbol of life cheered and
      beautified, exalted, hallowed. That name is ‘wife.’ Will you take that name from me?”
And still Isaura made no reply. She stood mute, and cold, and rigid as a statue of marble.
      At length, as if consciousness had been arrested and was struggling back, she sighed heavily,
      and passed her hands slowly over her forehead.
“Mockery, mockery,” she said then, with a smile half bitter, half plaintive, on her
      colourless lips. “Did you wait to ask me that question till you knew what my answer must be? I
      have pledged the name of wife to another.”
“No, no; you say that to rebuke, to punish me! Unsay it! unsay it!”
Isaura beheld the anguish of his face with bewildered eyes. “How can my words pain you?” she
      said, drearily. “Did you not write that I had unfitted myself to be wife to you?”
“I?”
“That I had left behind me the peaceful immunities of private life? I felt you were so
      right! Yes! I am affianced to one who thinks that in spite of that misfortune—”
“Stop, I command you—stop! You saw my letter to Mrs. Morley. I have not had one moment free
      from torture and remorse since I wrote it. But whatever in that letter you might justly
      resent—”
“I did not resent—”
Graham heard not the interruption, but hurried on. “You would forgive could you read my
      heart. No matter. Every sentiment in that letter, except those which conveyed admiration, I
      retract. Be mine, and instead of presuming to check in you the irresistible impulse of genius
      to the first place in the head or the heart of the world, I teach myself to encourage, to
      share, to exult in it. Do you know what a difference there is between the absent one and the
      present one—between the distant image against whom our doubts, our fears, our suspicions,
      raise up hosts of imaginary giants, barriers of visionary walls, and the beloved face before
      the sight of which the hosts are fled, the walls are vanished? Isaura, we meet again. You know
      now from my own lips that I love you. I think your lips will not deny that you love me. You
      say that you are affianced to another. Tell the man frankly, honestly, that you mistook your
      heart. It is not yours to give. Save yourself, save him, from a union in which there can be no
      happiness.”
“It is too late,” said Isaura, with hollow tones, but with no trace of vacillating weakness
      on her brow and lips. “Did I say now to that other one, ‘I break the faith that I pledged to
      you,’ I should kill him, body and soul. Slight thing though I be, to him I am all in all; to
      you, Mr. Vane, to you a memory—the memory of one whom a year, perhaps a month, hence, you will
      rejoice to think you have escaped.”
She passed from him—passed away from the flowers and the starlight; and when
      Graham,—recovering from the stun of her crushing words, and with the haughty mien and stop of
      the man who goes forth from the ruin of his hopes, leaning for support upon his pride,—when
      Graham re-entered the room, all the guests had departed save only Alain, who was still
      exchanging whispered words with Valerie.
