<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER VIII.</head>
<p>If Graham Vane had been before caressed and courted for himself, he was more than ever
      appreciated by polite society, now that he added the positive repute of wealth to that of a
      promising intellect. Fine ladies said that Graham Vane was a match for any girl. Eminent
      politicians listened to him with a more attentive respect, and invited him to selecter
      dinner-parties. His cousin the Duke urged him to announce his candidature for the county, and
      purchase back, at least, the old Stamm-schloss. But Graham obstinately refused to entertain
      either proposal, continued to live as economically as before in his old apartments, and bore
      with an astonishing meekness of resignation the unsolicited load of fashion heaped upon his
      shoulders. At heart he was restless and unhappy. The mission bequeathed to him by Richard King
      haunted his thoughts like a spectre not to be exorcised. Was his whole life to be passed in
      the weary sustainment of an imposture which in itself was gall and wormwood to a nature
      constitutionally frank and open? Was he forever to appear a rich man and live as a poor one?
      Was he till his deathbed to be deemed a sordid miser whenever he refused a just claim on his
      supposed wealth, and to feel his ambition excluded from the objects it earnestly coveted, and
      which he was forced to appear too much of an Epicurean philosopher to prize?</p>
<p>More torturing than all else to the man’s innermost heart was the consciousness that he had
      not conquered, could not conquer, the yearning love with which Isaura had inspired him, and
      yet that against such love all his reasonings, all his prejudices, more stubbornly than ever
      were combined. In the French newspapers which he had glanced over while engaged in his
      researches in Germany-nay, in German critical journals themselves—he had seen so many notices
      of the young author,—highly eulogistic, it is true, but which to his peculiar notions were
      more offensive than if they had been sufficiently condemnatory of her work to discourage her
      from its repetition; notices which seemed to him the supreme impertinences which no man likes
      exhibited towards the woman to whom he would render the chivalrous homage of respect.
      Evidently this girl had become as much public property as if she had gone on the stage. Minute
      details of her personal appearance,—of the dimples on her cheek, of the whiteness of her arms,
      of her peculiar way of dressing her hair; anecdotes of her from childhood (of course invented,
      but how could Graham know that?); of the reasons why she had adopted the profession of author
      instead of that of the singer; of the sensation she had created in certain salons (to Graham,
      who knew Paris so well, salons in which he would not have liked his wife to appear); of the
      compliments paid to her by grands seigneurs noted for their liaisons with ballet-dancers, or
      by authors whose genius soared far beyond the flammantia maenia of a world confined by respect
      for one’s neighbours’ land-marks,—all this, which belongs to ground of personal gossip
      untouched by English critics of female writers, ground especially favoured by Continental,
      and, I am grieved to say, by American journalists,—all this was to the sensitive Englishman
      much what the minute inventory of Egeria’s charms would have been to Numa Pompilius. The
      nymph, hallowed to him by secret devotion, was vulgarized by the noisy hands of the mob, and
      by the popular voices, which said, “We know more about Egeria than you do.” And when he
      returned to England, and met with old friends familiar to Parisian life, who said, “of course
      you have read the Cicogna’s roman. What do you think of it? Very fine writing, I dare say, but
      above me. I go in for ‘Les Mysteres de Paris’ or ‘Monte Cristo;’ but I even find Georges Sand
      a bore,” then as a critic Graham Vane fired up, extolled the roman he would have given his
      ears for Isaura never to have written; but retired from the contest muttering inly, “How can
      I—I, Graham Vane—how can I be such an idiot; how can I in every hour of the twenty-four sigh
      to myself, ‘What are other women to me? Isaura, Isaura!’”</p>
</div>