
CHAPTER I.
On the 8th of May the vote of the plebiscite was recorded,—between seven and eight millions
      of Frenchmen in support of the Imperial programme—in plain words, of the Emperor
      himself—against a minority of 1,500,000. But among the 1,500,000 were the old
      throne-shakers-those who compose and those who lead the mob of Paris. On the 14th, as Rameau
      was about to quit the editorial bureau of his printing-office, a note was brought in to him
      which strongly excited his nervous system. It contained a request to see him forthwith, signed
      by those two distinguished foreign members of the Secret Council of Ten, Thaddeus Loubinsky
      and Leonardo Raselli.
The meetings of that Council had been so long suspended that Rameau had almost forgotten its
      existence. He gave orders to admit the conspirators. The two men entered, the Pole, tall,
      stalwart, and with martial stride—the Italian, small, emaciated, with skulking, noiseless,
      cat-like step, both looking wondrous threadbare, and in that state called “shabby genteel,”
      which belongs to the man who cannot work for his livelihood, and assumes a superiority over
      the man who can. Their outward appearance was in notable discord with that of the
      poet-politician—he all new in the last fashions of Parisian elegance, and redolent of Parisian
      prosperity and extrait de Mousseline!
“Confrere,” said the Pole, seating himself on the edge of the table, while the Italian
      leaned against the mantelpiece, and glanced round the room with furtive eye, as if to detect
      its innermost secrets, or decide where safest to drop a Lucifer-match for its
      conflagration,—“confrere,” said the Pole, “your country needs you—”
“Rather the cause of all countries,” interposed the Italian softly,—“Humanity.”
“Please to explain yourselves; but stay, wait a moment,” said Rameau; and rising, he went to
      the door, opened it, looked forth, ascertained that the coast was clear, then reclosed the
      door as cautiously as a prudent man closes his pocket whenever shabby-genteel visitors appeal
      to him in the cause of his country, still more if they appeal in that of Humanity.
“Confrere,” said the Pole, “this day a movement is to be made—a demonstration on behalf of
      your country—”
“Of Humanity,” again softly interposed the Italian. “Attend and share it,” said the
      Pole.
“Pardon me,” said Rameau, “I do not know what you mean. I am now the editor of a journal in
      which the proprietor does not countenance violence; and if you come to me as a member of the
      Council, you must be aware that I should obey no orders but that of its president, whom I—I
      have not seen for nearly a year; indeed I know not if the Council still exists.”
“The Council exists, and with it the obligation it imposes,” replied Thaddeus.
“Pampered with luxury,” here the Pole raised his voice, “do you dare to reject the voice of
      Poverty and Freedom?”
“Hush, dear but too vehement confrere,” murmured the bland Italian; “permit me to dispel the
      reasonable doubts of our confrere,” and he took out of his breast-pocket a paper which he
      presented to Rameau; on it were written these words:
“This evening May 24th. Demonstration.—Faubourg du Temple.—Watch events, under orders of A.
      M. Bid the youngest member take that first opportunity to test nerves and discretion. He is
      not to act, but to observe.”
No name was appended to this instruction, but a cipher intelligible to all members of the
      Council as significant of its president, Jean Lebeau.
“If I err not,” said the Italian, “Citizen Rameau is our youngest confrere.”
Rameau paused. The penalties for disobedience to an order of the President of the Council
      were too formidable to be disregarded. There could be no doubt that,—though his name was not
      mentioned, he, Rameau, was accurately designated as the youngest member of the Council. Still,
      however he might have owed his present position to the recommendation of Lebeau, there was
      nothing in the conversation of M. de Mauleon which would warrant participation in a popular
      emeute by the editor of a journal belonging to that mocker of the mob. Ah! but—and here again
      he glanced over the paper—he was asked “not to act; but to observe.” To observe was the duty
      of a journalist. He might go to the demonstration as De Mauleon confessed he had gone to the
      Communist Club, a philosophical spectator.
“You do not disobey this order?” said the Pole, crossing his arms.
“I shall certainly go into the Faubourg du Temple this evening,” answered Rameau, drily, “I
      have business that way.”
“Bon!” said the Pole; “I did not think you would fail us, though you do edit a journal which
      says not a word on the duties that bind the French people to the resuscitation of Poland.”
“And is not pronounced in decided accents upon the cause of the human race,” put in the
      Italian, whispering.
“I do not write the political articles in Le Seas Commun,” answered Rameau; “and I suppose
      that our president is satisfied with them since he recommended me to the preference of the
      person who does. Have you more to say? Pardon me, my time is precious, for it does not belong
      to me.”
“Eno’!” said the Italian, “we will detain you no longer.” Here, with a bow and a smile, he
      glided towards the door.
“Confrere,” muttered the Pole, lingering, “you must have become very rich!—do not forget the
      wrongs of Poland—I am their Representative—I—speaking in that character, not as myself
      individually—I have not breakfasted!”
Rameau, too thoroughly Parisian not to be as lavish of his own money as he was envious of
      another’s, slipped some pieces of gold in the Pole’s hand. The Pole’s bosom heaved with manly
      emotion: “These pieces bear the effigies of the tyrant—I accept them as redeemed from disgrace
      by their uses to Freedom.”
“Share them with Signor Raselli in the name of the same cause,” whispered Rameau, with a
      smile he might have plagiarised from De Mauleon.
The Italian, whose ear was inured to whispers, heard and turned round as he stood at the
      threshold.
“No, confrere of France—no, confrere of Poland—I am Italian. All ways to take the life of an
      enemy are honourable—no way is honourable which begs money from a friend.”
An hour or so later, Rameau was driven in his comfortable coupe to the Faubourg du
      Temple.
Suddenly, at the angle of a street, his coachman was stopped—a rough-looking man appeared at
      the door—__"Descends, mon petit bourgeois__.” Behind the rough-looking man were menacing
      faces.
Rameau was not physically a coward—very few Frenchmen are, still fewer Parisians; and still
      fewer no matter what their birthplace, the men whom we call vain—the men who over-much covet
      distinction, and over-much dread reproach.
“Why should I descend at your summons?” said Rameau, haughtily. “Bah! Coachman, drive
      on!”
The rough-looking man opened the door, and silently extended a hand to Rameau, saying
      gently: “Take my advice, mon bourgeois. Get out—we want your carriage. It is a day of
      barricades—every little helps, even your coupe!”
While this man spoke others gesticulated; some shrieked out, “He is an employer! he thinks
      he can drive over the employed!”
Some leader of the crowd—a Parisian crowd always has a classical leader, who has never read
      the classics—thundered forth, “Tarquin’s car! Down with Tarquin!” Therewith came a yell, “A la
      lanterne—Tarquin!”
We Anglo-Saxons, of the old country or the new, are not familiarised to the dread roar of a
      populace delighted to have a Roman authority for tearing us to pieces; still Americans know
      what is Lynch law. Rameau was in danger of Lynch law, when suddenly a face not unknown to him
      interposed between himself and the rough-looking man.
“Ha!” cried this new comer, “my young confrere, Gustave Rameau, welcome! Citizens, make way.
      I answer for this patriot—I, Armand Monnier. He comes to help use! Is this the way you receive
      him?” Then in a low voice to Rameau, “Come out. Give your coupe to the barricade. What matters
      such rubbish? Trust to me—I expected you. Hist!—Lebeau bids me see that you are safe.” Rameau
      then, seeking to drape himself in majesty,—as the aristocrats of journalism in a city wherein
      no other aristocracy is recognised naturally and commendably do, when ignorance combined with
      physical strength asserts itself to be a power, beside which the power of knowledge is what a
      learned poodle is to a tiger—Rameau then descended from his coupe, and said to this Titan of
      labour, as a French marquis might have said to his valet, and as, when the French marquis has
      become a ghost of the past, the man who keeps a coupe says to the man who mends its wheels,
      “Honest fellow, I trust you.”
Monnier led the journalist through the mob to the rear of the barricade hastily constructed.
      Here were assembled very motley groups.
The majority were ragged boys, the gamins of Paris, commingled with several women of no
      reputable appearance, some dingily, some gaudily apparelled. The crowd did not appear as if
      the business in hand was a very serious one. Amidst the din of voices the sounds of laughter
      rose predominant, jests and bon mots flew from lip to lip. The astonishing good-humour of the
      Parisians was not yet excited into the ferocity that grows out of it by a street contest. It
      was less like a popular emeute than a gathering of schoolboys, bent not less on fun than on
      mischief. But, still, amid this gayer crowd were sinister, lowering faces; the fiercest were
      not those of the very poor, but rather of artisans, who, to judge by their dress, seemed well
      off of men belonging to yet higher grades. Rameau distinguished amongst these the medecin des
      pauvres, the philosophical atheist, sundry young, long-haired artists, middle aged writers for
      the Republican press, in close neighbourhood with ruffians of villainous aspect, who might
      have been newly returned from the galleys. None were regularly armed; still revolvers and
      muskets and long knives were by no means unfrequently interspersed among the rioters. The
      whole scene was to Rameau a confused panorama, and the dissonant tumult of yells and laughter,
      of menace and joke, began rapidly to act on his impressionable nerves. He felt that which is
      the prevalent character of a Parisian riot—the intoxication of an impulsive sympathy; coming
      there as a reluctant spectator, if action commenced he would have been borne readily into the
      thick of the action—he could not have helped it; already he grew impatient of the suspense of
      strife. Monnier having deposited him safely with his back to a wall, at the corner of a street
      handy for flight, if flight became expedient, had left him for several minutes, having
      business elsewhere. Suddenly the whisper of the Italian stole into his ear—“These men are
      fools. This is not the way to do business; this does not hurt the robber of Nice—Garibaldi’s
      Nice: they should have left it to me.”
“What would you do?”
“I have invented a new machine,” whispered the Friend of humanity; “it would remove all at
      one blow—lion and lioness, whelp and jackals—and then the Revolution if you will! not this
      paltry tumult. The cause of the human race is being frittered away. I am disgusted with
      Lebeau. Thrones are not overturned by gamins.”
Before Rameau could answer, Monnier rejoined him. The artisan’s face was overcast—his lips
      compressed, yet quivering with indignation. “Brother,” he said to Rameau, “to-day the cause is
      betrayed”—(the word trahi was just then coming into vogue at Paris)—“the blouses I counted on
      are recreant. I have just learned that all is quiet in the other quartiers where the rising
      was to have been simultaneous with this. We are in a guet-apens—the soldiers will be down on
      us in a few minutes; hark! don’t you hear the distant tramp? Nothing for us but to die like
      men. Our blood will be avenged later. Here,” and he thrust a revolver into Rameau’s hand. Then
      with a lusty voice that rang through the crowd, he shouted “Vive le peuple!” The rioters
      caught and re-echoed the cry, mingled with other cries,’ “Vive la Republique!” “Vive le
      drapeau rouge!”
The shouts were yet at their full when a strong hand grasped Monnier’s arm, and a clear,
      deep, but low voice thrilled through his ear: “Obey! I warned you. No fight to-day. Time not
      ripe. All that is needed is done—do not undo it. Hist! the sergens de ville are force enough
      to disperse the swarm of those gnats. Behind the sergens come soldiers who will not
      fraternise. Lose not one life to-day. The morrow when we shall need every man—nay, every
      gamin—will dawn soon. Answer not. Obey!” The same strong hand quitting its hold on Monnier,
      then seized Rameau by the wrist, and the same deep voice said, “Come with me.” Rameau, turning
      in amaze, not unmixed with anger, saw beside him a tall man with sombrero hat pressed close
      over his head, and in the blouse of a labourer, but through such disguise he recognized the
      pale grey whiskers and green spectacles of Lebeau. He yielded passively to the grasp that led
      him away down the deserted street at the angle.
At the further end of that street, however, was heard the steady thud of hoofs.
“The soldiers are taking the mob at its rear,” said Lebeau, calmly; “we have not a moment to
      lose—this way,” and he plunged into a dismal court, then into a labyrinth of lanes, followed
      mechanically by Rameau. They issued at last on the Boulevards, in which the usual loungers
      were quietly sauntering, wholly unconscious of the riot elsewhere. “Now, take that fiacre and
      go home; write down your impressions of what you have seen, and take your MS. to M. de
      Mauleon.” Lebeau here quitted him.
Meanwhile all happened as Lebeau had predicted. The sergens de ville showed themselves in
      front of the barricades, a small troop of mounted soldiers appeared in the rear. The mob
      greeted the first with yells and a shower of stones; at the sight of the last they fled in all
      directions; and the sergens de ville, calmly scaling the barricades, carried off in triumph,
      as prisoners of war, 4 gamins, 3 women, and 1 Irishman loudly protesting innocence, and
      shrieking “Murther!” So ended the first inglorious rise against the plebiscite and the Empire,
      on the 14th of May, 1870.
From Isaura Cicogna to Madame de Grantmesnil. Saturday. May 21.
“I am still, dearest Eulalie, under the excitement of impressions wholly new to me. I have
      this day witnessed one of those scenes which take us out of our private life, not into the
      world of fiction, but of history, in which we live as in the life of a nation. You know how
      intimate I have become with Valerie Duplessis. She is in herself so charming in her
      combination of petulant wilfulness and guileless naivete, that she might sit as a model for
      one of your exquisite heroines. Her father, who is in great favour at Court, had tickets for
      the Salle des Etats of the Louvre today—when, as the journals will tell you, the results of
      the plebiscite were formally announced to the Emperor—and I accompanied him and Valerie. I
      felt, on entering the hall, as if I had been living for months in an atmosphere of false
      rumours, for those I chiefly meet in the circles of artists and men of letters, and the wits
      and flaneurs who haunt such circles, are nearly all hostile to the Emperor. They agree, at
      least, in asserting the decline of his popularity—the failure of his intellectual powers; in
      predicting his downfall—deriding the notion of a successor in his son. Well, I know not how to
      reconcile these statements with the spectacle I have beheld to-day.
“In the chorus of acclamation amidst which the Emperor entered the hall, it seemed as if one
      heard the voice of the France he had just appealed to. If the Fates are really weaving woe and
      shame in his woof, it is in hues which, to mortal eyes, seem brilliant with glory and joy.
“You will read the address of the President of the Corps Legislatif; I wonder how it will
      strike you! I own fairly that me it wholly carried away. At each sentiment I murmured to
      myself, ‘Is not this true? and, if true, are France and human nature ungrateful?’
“‘It is now,’ said the President, ‘eighteen years since France, wearied with confusion, and
      anxious for security, confiding in your genuis and the Napoleonic dynasty, placed in your
      hands, together with the Imperial Crown, the authority which the public necessity demanded.’
      Then the address proceeded to enumerate the blessings that ensued—social order speedily
      restored—the welfare of all classes of society promoted—advances in commerce and manufactures
      to an extent hitherto unknown. Is not this true? and, if so, are you, noble daughter of
      France, ungrateful?
“Then came words which touched me deeply—me, who, knowing nothing of politics, still feel
      the link that unites Art to Freedom: ‘But from the first your Majesty has looked forward to
      the time when this concentration of power would no longer correspond to the aspirations of a
      tranquil and reassured country, and, foreseeing the progress of modern society, you proclaimed
      that ‘Liberty must be the crowning of the edifice.‘’ Passing then over the previous gradual
      advances in popular government, the President came to the ‘present self-abnegation,
      unprecedented in history,’ and to the vindication of that plebiscite which I have heard so
      assailed—viz., Fidelity to the great principle upon which the throne was founded, required
      that so important a modification of a power bestowed by the people should not be made without
      the participation of the people themselves. Then, enumerating the millions who had welcomed
      the new form of government—the President paused a second or two, as if with suppressed
      emotion—and every one present held his breath, till, in a deeper voice, through which there
      ran a quiver that thrilled through the hall, he concluded with—‘France is with you; France
      places the cause of liberty under the protection of your dynasty and the great bodies of the
      State.’ Is France with him? I know not; but if the malcontents of France had been in the hall
      at that moment, I believe they would have felt the power of that wonderful sympathy which
      compels all the hearts in great audiences to beat in accord, and would have answered, ‘It is
      true.’
“All eyes now fixed on the Emperor, and I noticed few eyes which were not moist with tears.
      You know that calm unrevealing face of his—a face which sometimes disappoints expectation. But
      there is that in it which I have seen in no other, but which I can imagine to have been common
      to the Romans of old, the dignity that arises from self-control—an expression which seems
      removed from the elation of joy, the depression of sorrow—not unbecoming to one who has known
      great vicissitudes of Fortune, and is prepared alike for her frowns or her smiles.
“I had looked at that face while M. Schneider was reading the address—it moved not a muscle,
      it might have been a face of marble. Even when at moments the words were drowned in applause
      and the Empress, striving at equal composure, still allowed us to see a movement of her eye
      lids, a tremble on her lips. The boy at his right, heir to his dynasty, had his looks fixed on
      the President, as if eagerly swallowing each word in the address, save once or twice, when he
      looked around the hall curiously, and with a smile as a mere child might look. He struck me as
      a mere child. Next to the Prince was one of those countenances which once seen are never to be
      forgotten—the true Napoleonic type, brooding, thoughtful, ominous, beautiful. But not with the
      serene energy that characterises the head of the first Napoleon when Emperor, and wholly
      without the restless eagerness for action which is stamped in the lean outline of Napoleon
      when First Consul: no—in Prince Napoleon there is a beauty to which, as woman, I could never
      give my heart—were I a man, the intellect that would not command my trust. But, nevertheless,
      in beauty, it is signal, and in that beauty the expression of intellect is predominant.
“Oh, dear Eulalie, how I am digressing! The Emperor spoke—and believe me, Eulalie, whatever
      the journals or your compatriots may insinuate, there is in that man no sign of declining
      intellect or failing health. I care not what may be his years, but that man is in mind and in
      health as young as Caesar when he crossed the Rubicon.
“The old cling to the past—they do not go forward to the future. There was no going back in
      that speech of the Emperor. There was something grand and something young in the modesty with
      which he put aside all references to that which his Empire had done in the past, and said with
      a simple earnestness of manner which I cannot adequately describe—
“‘We must more than ever look fearlessly forward to the future. Who can be opposed to the
      progressive march of a regime founded by a great people in the midst of political disturbance,
      and which now is fortified by liberty?’
“As he closed, the walls of that vast hall seemed to rock with an applause that must have
      been heard on the other side of the Seine.
“‘Vive l’Empereur!’” “‘Vive l’Imperatrice!’” “‘Vive le Prince Imperial!’”—and the last cry
      was yet more prolonged than the others, as if to affirm the dynasty.
“Certainly I can imagine no Court in the old days of chivalry more splendid than the
      audience in that grand hall of the Louvre. To the right of the throne all the ambassadors of
      the civilised world in the blaze of their rich costumes and manifold orders. In the gallery at
      the left, yet more behind, the dresses and jewels of the dames d’honneur and of the great
      officers of State. And when the Empress rose to depart, certainly my fancy cannot picture a
      more queenlike image, or one that seemed more in unison with the representation of royal pomp
      and power. The very dress, of colour which would have been fatal to the beauty of most women
      equally fair—a deep golden colour—(Valerie profanely called it buff)—seemed so to suit the
      splendour of the ceremony and the day; it seemed as if that stately form stood in the midst of
      a sunlight reflected from itself. Day seemed darkened when that sunlight passed away.
“I fear you will think I have suddenly grown servile to the gauds and shows of mere royalty.
      I ask myself if that be so—I think not. Surely it is a higher sense of greatness which has
      been impressed on me by the pageant of to-day I feel as if there were brought vividly before
      me the majesty of France, through the representation of the ruler she has crowned.
“I feel also as if there, in that hall, I found a refuge from all the warring contests in
      which no two seem to me in agreement as to the sort of government to be established in place
      of the present. The ‘Liberty’ clamoured for by one would cut the throat of the ‘Liberty’
      worshipped by another.
“I see a thousand phantom forms of LIBERTY—but only one living symbol of ORDER—that which
      spoke from a throne to-day.”
Isaura left her letter uncompleted. On the following Monday she was present at a crowded
      soiree given by M. Louvier. Among the guests were some of the most eminent leaders of the
      Opposition, including that vivacious master of sharp sayings, M. P———-, whom Savarin entitled
      “the French Sheridan;” if laws could be framed in epigrams he would be also the French
      Solon.
There, too, was Victor de Mauleon, regarded by the Republican party with equal admiration
      and distrust. For the distrust, he himself pleasantly accounted in talk with Savarin.
“How can I expect to be trusted? I represent ‘Common Sense;’ every Parisian likes Common
      Sense in print, and cries ‘Je suis trahi’ when Common Sense is to be put into action.”
A group of admiring listeners had collected round one (perhaps the most brilliant) of those
      oratorical lawyers by whom, in France, the respect for all laws has been so often talked away:
      he was speaking of the Saturday’s ceremonial with eloquent indignation. It was a mockery to
      France to talk of her placing Liberty under the protection of the Empire.
There was a flagrant token of the military force under which civil freedom was held in the
      very dress of the Emperor and his insignificant son: the first in the uniform of a General of
      Division; the second, forsooth, in that of a sous-lieutenant. The other liberal chiefs chimed
      in: “The army,” said one, “was an absurd expense; it must be put down:” “The world was grown
      too civilised for war,” said another: “The Empress was priest-ridden,” said a third: “Churches
      might be tolerated; Voltaire built a church, but a church simply to the God of Nature, not of
      priestcraft,”—and so on.
Isaura, whom any sneer at religion pained and revolted, here turned away from the orators to
      whom she had before been listening with earnest attention, and her eyes fell on the
      countenance of De Mauleon, who was seated opposite.
The countenance startled her, its expression was so angrily scornful; that expression,
      however, vanished at once as De Mauleon’s eyes met her own, and drawing his chair near to her,
      he said, smiling: “Your look tells me that I almost frightened you by the ill-bred frankness
      with which my face must have betrayed my anger, at hearing such imbecile twaddle from men who
      aspire to govern our turbulent France. You remember that after Lisbon was destroyed by an
      earthquake a quack advertised ‘pills against earthquakes.’ These messieurs are not so cunning
      as the quack; he did not name the ingredients of his pills.”
“But, M. de Mauleon,” said Isaura, “if you, being opposed to the Empire, think so ill of the
      wisdom of those who would destroy it, are you prepared with remedies for earthquakes more
      efficacious than their pills?”
“I reply as a famous English statesman, when in opposition, replied to a somewhat similar
      question,—‘I don’t prescribe till I’m called in.’”
“To judge by the seven millions and a half whose votes were announced on Saturday, and by
      the enthusiasm with which the Emperor was greeted, there is too little fear of an earthquake
      for a good trade of the pills of these messieurs, or for fair play to the remedies you will
      not disclose till called in.”
“Ah, Mademoiselle! playful wit from lips not formed for politics makes me forget all about
      emperors and earthquakes. Pardon that commonplace compliment—remember I am a Frenchman, and
      cannot help being frivolous.”
“You rebuke my presumption too gently. True, I ought not to intrude political subjects on
      one like you—I understand so little about them—but this is my excuse, I do so desire to know
      more.”
M. de Mauleon paused, and looked at her earnestly with a kindly, half compassionate look,
      wholly free from the impertinence of gallantry. “Young poetess,” he said, softly, “you care
      for politics. Happy, indeed, is he—and whether he succeed or fail in his ambition abroad,
      proud should he be of an ambition crowned at home—he who has made you desire to know more of
      politics!”
The girl felt the blood surge to her temples. How could she have been so self-confessed? She
      made no reply, nor did M. de Mauleon seem to expect one; with that rare delicacy of high
      breeding which appears in France to belong to a former generation, he changed his tone, and
      went on as if there had been no interruption to the question her words implied.
“You think the Empire secure—that it is menaced by on earthquake? You deceive yourself. The
      Emperor began with a fatal mistake, but a mistake it needs many years to discover. He
      disdained the slow natural process of adjustment between demand and supply—employer and
      workmen. He desired—no ignoble ambition—to make Paris the wonder of the world, the eternal
      monument of his reign. In so doing, he sought to create artificial modes of content for
      revolutionary workmen. Never has any ruler had such tender heed of manual labour to the
      disparagement of intellectual culture. Paris is embellished; Paris is the wonder of the world;
      other great towns have followed its example; they, too, have their rows of palaces and
      temples. Well, the time comes when the magician can no longer give work to the spirits he
      raises; then they must fall on him and rend: out of the very houses he built for the better
      habitation of workmen will flock the malcontents who cry, ‘Down with the Empire!’ On the 21st
      of May you witnessed the pompous ceremony which announces to the Empire a vast majority of
      votes, that will be utterly useless to it except as food for gunpowder in the times that are
      at hand. Seven days before, on the 14th of May, there was a riot in the Faubourg
      d’Temple—easily put down—you scarcely hear of it. That riot was not the less necessary to
      those who would warn the Empire that it is mortal. True, the riot disperses—but it is
      unpunished; riot unpunished is a revolution begun. The earthquake is nearer than you think;
      and for that earthquake what are the pills you quacks advertise? They prate of an age too
      enlightened for war; they would mutilate the army—nay, disband it if they could—with Prussia
      next door to France. Prussia, desiring, not unreasonably, to take that place in the world
      which France now holds, will never challenge France; if she did, she would be too much in the
      wrong to find a second: Prussia knowing that she has to do with the vainest, the most
      conceited, the rashest antagonist that ever flourished a rapier in the face of a
      spadassin—Prussia will make France challenge her.
“And how do ces messieurs deal with the French army? Do they dare to say to the ministers,
      ‘Reform it’? Do they dare say, ‘Prefer for men whose first duty it is to obey, discipline to
      equality—insist on the distinction between the officer and the private, and never confound it;
      Prussian officers are well-educated gentlemen, see that yours are’? Oh no; they are democrats
      too stanch not to fraternise with an armed mob; they content themselves with grudging an extra
      sou to the Commissariat, and winking at the millions fraudulently pocketed by some ‘Liberal
      contractor.’ Dieu des dieux! France to be beaten, not as at Waterloo by hosts combined, but in
      fair duel by a single foe! Oh, the shame! the shame! But as the French army is now organised,
      beaten she must be, if she meets the march of the German.”
“You appal me with your sinister predictions,” said Isaura; “but, happily, there is no sign
      of war. M. Duplessis, who is in the confidence of the Emperor, told us only the other day that
      Napoleon, on learning the result of the plebiscite, said: ‘The foreign journalists who have
      been insisting that the Empire cannot coexist with free institutions, will no longer hint that
      it can be safely assailed from without.’ And more than ever I may say L’Empire c’est la
      paix!”
Monsieur de Mauleon shrugged his shoulders. “The old story—Troy and the wooden horse.”
“Tell me, M. de Mauleon, why do you, who so despise the Opposition, join with it in opposing
      the Empire?”
“Mademoiselle, the Empire opposes me; while it lasts I cannot be even a Depute; when it is
      gone, Heaven knows that I may be, perhaps Dictator; one thing, you may rely upon, that I
      would, if not Dictator myself, support any man who was better fitted for that task.”
“Better fitted to destroy the liberty which he pretended to fight for.”
“Not exactly so,” replied M. de Mauleon, imperturbably—“better fitted to establish a good
      government in lieu of the bad one he had fought against, and the much worse governments that
      would seek to turn France into a madhouse, and make the maddest of the inmates the mad
      doctor!” He turned away, and here their conversation ended.
But it so impressed Isaura, that the same night she concluded her letter to Madame de
      Grantmesnil, by giving a sketch of its substance, prefaced by an ingenuous confession that she
      felt less sanguine confidence in the importance of the applauses which had greeted the Emperor
      at the Saturday’s ceremonial, and ending thus: “I can but confusedly transcribe the words of
      this singular man, and can give you no notion of the manner and the voice which made them
      eloquent. Tell me, can there be any truth in his gloomy predictions? I try not to think so,
      but they seem to rest over that brilliant hall of the Louvre like an ominous
      thunder-cloud.”
