
CHAPTER VIII.
Graham Vane has been for some days in the apartment rented of M. Georges. He takes it in the
      name of Mr. Lamb,—a name wisely chosen, less common than Thompson and Smith, less likely to be
      supposed an assumed name, yet common enough not to be able easily to trace it to any special
      family. He appears, as he had proposed, in the character of an agent employed by a solicitor
      in London to execute sundry commissions and to collect certain outstanding debts. There is no
      need to mention the name of the solicitor; if there were, he could give the name of his own
      solicitor, to whose discretion he could trust implicitly. He dresses and acts up to his
      assumed character with the skill of a man who, like the illustrious Charles Fox, has, though
      in private representations, practised the stage-play in which Demosthenes said the triple art
      of oratory consisted; who has seen a great deal of the world, and has that adaptability of
      intellect which knowledge of the world lends to one who is so thoroughly in earnest as to his
      end that he agrees to be sportive as to his means.
The kind of language he employs when speaking English to Lebeau is that suited to the role
      of a dapper young underling of vulgar mind habituated to vulgar companionships. I feel it due,
      if not to Graham himself, at least to the memory of the dignified orator whose name he
      inherits, so to modify and soften the hardy style of that peculiar diction in which he
      disguises his birth and disgraces his culture, that it is only here and there that I can
      venture to indicate the general tone of it; but in order to supply my deficiencies therein,
      the reader has only to call to mind the forms of phraseology which polite novelists in vogue,
      especially young-lady novelists, ascribe to well-born gentlemen, and more emphatically to
      those in the higher ranks of the Peerage. No doubt Graham, in his capacity of critic, had been
      compelled to read, in order to review, those contributions to refined literature, and had
      familiarized himself to a vein of conversation abounding with “swell” and “stunner” and
      “awfully jolly,” in its libel on manners and outrage on taste.
He has attended nightly the cafe Jean Jacques; he has improved acquaintance with M. Georges
      and M. Lebeau; he has played at billiards, he has played at dominos, with the latter. He has
      been much surprised at the unimpeachable honesty which M. Lebeau has exhibited in both these
      games. In billiards, indeed, a man cannot cheat except by disguising his strength; it is much
      the same in dominos,—it is skill combined with luck, as in whist; but in whist there are modes
      of cheating which dominos do not allow,—you can’t mark a domino as you can a card. It was
      perfectly clear to Graham that M. Lebeau did not gain a livelihood by billiards or dominos at
      the cafe Jean Jacques. In the former he was not only a fair but a generous player. He played
      exceedingly well, despite his spectacles; but he gave, with something of a Frenchman’s lofty
      fanfaronnade, larger odds to his adversary than his play justified. In dominos, where such
      odds could not well be given, he insisted on playing such small stakes as two or three francs
      might cover. In short, M. Lebeau puzzled Graham. All about M. Lebeau, his manner, his talk,
      was irreproachable, and baffled suspicion; except in this,—Graham gradually discovered that
      the cafe had a quasi-political character. Listening to talkers round him, he overheard much
      that might well have shocked the notions of a moderate Liberal; much that held in disdain the
      objects to which, in 1869, an English Radical directed his aspirations. Vote by ballot,
      universal suffrage, etc.,—such objects the French had already attained. By the talkers at the
      cafe Jean Jacques they were deemed to be the tricky contrivances of tyranny. In fact, the talk
      was more scornful of what Englishmen understand by radicalism or democracy than Graham ever
      heard from the lips of an ultra-Tory. It assumed a strain of philosophy far above the vulgar
      squabbles of ordinary party politicians,—a philosophy which took for its fundamental
      principles the destruction of religion and of private property. These two objects seemed
      dependent the one on the other. The philosophers of the Jean Jacques held with that expounder
      of Internationalism, Eugene Dupont, “Nous ne voulons plus de religion, car les religions
      etouffent l’intelligence.”

 [Discours par Eugene Dupont a la Cloture du Congres de Bruxelles, Sept. 3, 1868]
      
Now and then, indeed, a dissentient voice was raised as to the existence of a Supreme Being,
      but, with one exception, it soon sank into silence. No voice was raised in defence of private
      property. These sages appeared for the most part to belong to the class of ouvriers or
      artisans. Some of them were foreigners,—Belgian, German, English; all seemed well off for
      their calling. Indeed they must have had comparatively high wages, to judge by their dress and
      the money they spent on regaling themselves. The language of several was well chosen, at times
      eloquent. Some brought with them women who seemed respectable, and who often joined in the
      conversation, especially when it turned upon the law of marriage as a main obstacle to all
      personal liberty and social improvement. If this was a subject on which the women did not all
      agree, still they discussed it, without prejudice and with admirable sang froid. Yet many of
      them looked like wives and mothers. Now and then a young journeyman brought with him a young
      lady of more doubtful aspect, but such a couple kept aloof from the others. Now and then, too,
      a man evidently of higher station than that of ouvrier, and who was received by the
      philosophers with courtesy and respect, joined one of the tables and ordered a bowl of punch
      for general participation. In such occasional visitors, Graham, still listening, detected a
      writer of the press; now and then, a small artist or actor or medical student. Among the
      habitues there was one man, an ouvrier, in whom Graham could not help feeling an interest. He
      was called Monnier, sometimes more familiarly Armand, his baptismal appellation. This man had
      a bold and honest expression of countenance. He talked like one who, if he had not read much,
      had thought much on the subjects he loved to discuss. He argued against the capital of
      employers quite as ably as Mr. Mill has argued against the rights of property in land. He was
      still more eloquent against the laws of marriage and Heritage. But his was the one voice not
      to be silenced in favour of a Supreme Being. He had at least the courage of his opinions, and
      was always thoroughly in earnest. M. Lebeau seemed to know this man, and honoured him with a
      nod and a smile, when passing by him to the table he generally occupied. This familiarity with
      a man of that class, and of opinions so extreme, excited Graham’s curiosity. One evening he
      said to Lebeau, “A queer fellow that you have just nodded to.
“How so?”
“Well, he has queer notions.”
“Notions shared, I believe, by many of your countrymen?”
“I should think not many. Those poor simpletons yonder may have caught ‘em from their French
      fellow-workmen, but I don’t think that even the gobemouches in our National Reform Society
      open their mouths to swallow such wasps.”
“Yet I believe the association to which most of those ouvriers belong had its origin in
      England.”
“Indeed! what association?”
“The International.”
“Ah, I have heard of that.”
Lebeau turned his green spectacles full on Graham’s face as he said slowly, “And what do you
      think of it?”
Graham prudently checked the disparaging reply that first occurred to him, and said, “I know
      so little about it that I would rather ask you.”
“I think it might become formidable if it found able leaders who knew how to use it. Pardon
      me, how came you to know of this cafe? Were you recommended to it?”
“No; I happened to be in this neighbourhood on business, and walked in, as I might into any
      other cafe.”
“You don’t interest yourself in the great social questions which are agitated below the
      surface of this best of all possible worlds?”
“I can’t say that I trouble my head much about them.”
“A game at dominos before M. Georges arrives?”
“Willingly. Is M. Georges one of those agitators below the surface?”
“No, indeed. It is for you to play.”
Here M. Georges arrived, and no further conversation on political or social questions
      ensued.
Graham had already called more than once at M. Lebeau’s office, and asked him to put into
      good French various letters on matters of business, the subjects of which had been furnished
      by M. Renard. The office was rather imposing and stately, considering the modest nature of M.
      Lebeau’s ostensible profession. It occupied the entire ground-floor of a corner house, with a
      front-door at one angle and a back-door at the other. The anteroom to his cabinet, and in
      which Graham had generally to wait some minutes before he was introduced, was generally well
      filled, and not only by persons who, by their dress and outward appearance, might be fairly
      supposed sufficiently illiterate to require his aid as polite letter-writers,—not only by
      servant-maids and grisettes, by sailors, zouaves, and journeymen workmen,—but not unfrequently
      by clients evidently belonging to a higher, or at least a richer, class of society,—men with
      clothes made by a fashionable tailor; men, again, who, less fashionably attired; looked like
      opulent tradesmen and fathers of well-to-do families,—the first generally young, the last
      generally middle-aged. All these denizens of a higher world were introduced by a saturnine
      clerk into M. Lebeau’s reception-room, very quickly and in precedence of the ouvriers and
      grisettes.
“What can this mean?” thought Graham; “is it really that this humble business avowed is the
      cloak to some political conspiracy concealed,—the International Association?” And so
      pondering, the clerk one day singled him from the crowd and admitted him into M. Lebeau’s
      cabinet. Graham thought the time had now arrived when he might safely approach the subject
      that had brought him to the Faubourg Montmartre.
“You are very good,” said Graham, speaking in the English of a young earl in our elegant
      novels,—“you are very good to let me in while you have so many swells and nobs waiting for you
      in the other room. But, I say, old fellow, you have not the cheek to tell me that they want
      you to correct their cocker or spoon for them by proxy?”
“Pardon me,” answered M. Lebeau in French, “if I prefer my own language in replying to you.
      I speak the English I learned many years ago, and your language in the beau monde, to which
      you evidently belong, is strange to me. You are quite right, however, in your surmise that I
      have other clients than those who, like yourself, think I could correct their verbs or their
      spelling. I have seen a great deal of the world,—I know something of it, and something of the
      law; so that many persons come to me for advice and for legal information on terms more
      moderate than those of an avoue. But my ante-chamber is full, I am pressed for time; excuse me
      if I ask you to say at once in what I can be agreeable to you to-day.”
“Ah!” said Graham, assuming a very earnest look, “you do know the world, that is clear; and
      you do know the law of France, eh?”
“Yes, a little.”
“What I wanted to say at present may have something to do with French law, and I meant to
      ask you either to recommend to me a sharp lawyer, or to tell me how I can best get at your
      famous police here.”
“Police?”
“I think I may require the service of one of those officers whom we in England call
      detectives; but if you are busy now, I can call to-morrow.”
“I spare you two minutes. Say at once, dear Monsieur, what you want with law or police.”
“I am instructed to find out the address of a certain Louise Duval, daughter of a
      drawing-master named Adolphe Duval, living in the Rue ——in the year 1848.”
Graham, while he thus said, naturally looked Lebeau in the face,—not pryingly, not
      significantly, but as a man generally does look in the face the other man whom he accosts
      seriously. The change in the face he regarded was slight, but it was unmistakable. It was the
      sudden meeting of the eyebrows, accompanied with the sudden jerk of the shoulder and bend of
      the neck, which betoken a man taken by surprise, and who pauses to reflect before he replies.
      His pause was but momentary,
“For what object is this address required?”
“That I don’t know; but evidently for some advantage to Madame or Mademoiselle Duval, if
      still alive, because my employer authorizes me to spend no less than L100 in ascertaining
      where she is, if alive, or where she was buried, if dead; and if other means fail, I am
      instructed to advertise to the effect that if Louise Duval, or, in case of her death, any
      children of hers living in the year 1849, will communicate with some person whom I may appoint
      at Paris, such intelligence, authenticated, may prove to the advantage of the party advertised
      for. I am, however, told not to resort to this means without consulting either with a legal
      adviser or the police.”
“Hem! have you inquired at the house where this lady was, you say, living in 1848?”
“Of course I have done that; but very clumsily, I dare say, through a friend, and learned
      nothing. But I must not keep you now. I think I shall apply at once to the police. What should
      I say when I get to the bureau?”
“Stop, Monsieur, stop. I do not advise you to apply to the police. It would be waste of time
      and money. Allow me to think over the matter. I shall see you this evening at the cafe Jean
      Jacques at eight o’clock. Till then do nothing.”
“All right; I obey you. The whole thing is out of my way of business awfully. Bonjour.”
