<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER XVII.</head>
<p>The warning announcement of some great effort on the part of the besieged, which Alain had
      given to Lemercier, was soon to be fulfilled.</p>
<p>For some days the principal thoroughfares were ominously lined with military convois. The
      loungers on the Boulevards stopped to gaze on the long defiles of troops and cannons,
      commissariat conveyances, and, saddening accompaniments! the vehicles of various ambulances
      for the removal of the wounded. With what glee the loungers said to each other “Enfin!” Among
      all the troops that Paris sent forth, none were so popular as those which Paris had not
      nurtured—the sailors. From the moment they arrived, the sailors had been the pets of the
      capital. They soon proved themselves the most notable contrast to that force which Paris
      herself had produced—the National Guard. Their frames were hardy, their habits active, their
      discipline perfect, their manners mild and polite. “Oh, if all our troops were like these!”
      was the common exclamation of the Parisians.</p>
<p>At last burst forth upon Paris the proclamations of General Trochu and General Ducrot; the
      first brief, calm, and Breton-like, ending with “Putting our trust in God. March on for our
      country:” the second more detailed, more candidly stating obstacles and difficulties, but
      fiery with eloquent enthusiasm, not unsupported by military statistics, in the 400 cannon,
      two-thirds of which were of the largest calibre, that no material object could resist; more
      than 150,000 soldiers, all well armed, well equipped, abundantly provided with munitions, and
      all (j’en a l’espoir) animated by an irresistible ardour. “For me,” concludes the General, “I
      am resolved. I swear before you, before the whole nation, that I will not re-enter Paris
      except as dead or victorious.”</p>
<p>At these proclamations, who then at Paris does not recall the burst of enthusiasm that
      stirred the surface? Trochu became once more popular; even the Communistic or atheistic
      journals refrained from complaining that he attended mass, and invited his countrymen to trust
      in God. Ducrot was more than popular—he was adored.</p>
<p>The several companies in which De Mauleon and Enguerrand served departed towards their post
      early on the same morning, that of the 28th. All the previous night, while Enguerrand was
      buried in profound slumber, Raoul remained in his brother’s room; sometimes on his knees
      before the ivory crucifix which had been their mother’s last birthday gift to her youngest
      son—sometimes seated beside the bed in profound and devout meditation. At daybreak, Madame de
      Vandemar stole into the chamber. Unconscious of his brother’s watch, he had asked her to wake
      him in good time, for the young man was a sound sleeper. Shading the candle she bore with one
      hand, with the other she drew aside the curtain, and looked at Enguerrand’s calm fair face,
      its lips parted in the happy smile which seemed to carry joy with it wherever its sunshine
      played. Her tears fell noiselessly on her darling’s cheek; she then knelt down and prayed for
      strength. As she rose she felt Raoul’s arm around her; they looked at each other in silence;
      then she bowed her head and wakened Enguerrand with her lips. “Pas de querelle, mes amis,” he
      murmured, opening his sweet blue eyes drowsily. “Ah, it was a dream! I thought Jules and Emile
      [two young friends of his] were worrying each other; and you know, dear Raoul, that I am the
      most officious of peacemakers. Time to rise, is it? No peacemaking to-day. Kiss me again,
      mother, and say ‘Bless thee.’”</p>
<p>“Bless thee, bless thee, my child,” cried the mother, wrapping her arms passionately round
      him, and in tones choked with sobs.</p>
<p>“Now leave me, maman,” said Enguerrand, resorting to the infantine ordinary name, which he
      had not used for years. “Raoul, stay and help me to dress. I must be tres beau to-day. I shall
      join thee at breakfast, maman. Early for such repast, but l’appetit vient en mangeant. Mind
      the coffee is hot.”</p>
<p>Enguerrand, always careful of each detail of dress, was especially so that morning, and
      especially gay, humming the old air, “Partant pour la Syrie.” But his gaiety was checked when
      Raoul, taking from his breast a holy talisman, which he habitually wore there, suspended it
      with loving hands round his brother’s neck. It was a small crystal set in Byzantine filigree;
      imbedded in it was a small splinter of wood, said by pious tradition to be a relic of the
      Divine Cross. It had been for centuries in the family of the Contessa di Rimini, and was given
      by her to Raoul, the only gift she had ever made him, as an emblem of the sinless purity of
      the affection that united those two souls in the bonds of the beautiful belief.</p>
<p>“She bade me transfer it to thee to-day, my brother,” said Raoul, simply; “and now without a
      pang I can gird on thee thy soldier’s sword.”</p>
<p>Enguerrand clasped his brother in his arms, and kissed him with passionate fervour. “Oh,
      Raoul, how I love thee! how good thou hast ever been to me! how many sins thou hast saved me
      from! how indulgent thou hast been to those from which thou couldst not save! Think on that,
      my brother, in case we do not meet again on earth.”</p>
<p>“Hush, hush, Enguerrand! No gloomy forebodings now! Come, come hither, my half of life, my
      sunny half of life!” and uttering these words, he led Enguerrand towards the crucifix, and
      there, in deeper and more solemn voice, said, “Let us pray.” So the brothers knelt side by
      side, and Raoul prayed aloud as only such souls can pray.</p>
<p>When they descended into the salon where breakfast was set out, they found assembled several
      of their relations, and some of Enguerrand’s young friends not engaged in the sortie. One or
      two of the latter, indeed, were disabled from fighting by wounds in former fields; they left
      their sick-beds to bid him good-bye. Unspeakable was the affection this genial nature inspired
      in all who came into the circle of its winning magic; and when, tearing himself from them, he
      descended the stair, and passed with light step through the Porte cochere, there was a crowd
      around the house—so widely had his popularity spread among even the lower classes, from which
      the Mobiles in his regiment were chiefly composed. He departed to the place of rendezvous amid
      a chorus of exhilarating cheers.</p>
<p>Not thus lovingly tended on, not thus cordially greeted, was that equal idol of a former
      generation, Victor de Mauleon. No pious friend prayed beside his couch, no loving kiss waked
      him from his slumbers. At the grey of the November dawn he rose from a sleep which had no
      smiling dreams, with that mysterious instinct of punctual will which cannot even go to sleep
      without fixing beforehand the exact moment in which sleep shall end. He, too, like Enguerrand,
      dressed himself with care—unlike Enguerrand, with care strictly soldier-like. Then, seeing he
      had some little time yet before him, he rapidly revisited the pigeonholes and drawers in which
      might be found by prying eyes anything he would deny to them curiosity. All that he found of
      this sort were some letters in female handwriting, tied together with faded ribbon, relics of
      earlier days, and treasured throughout later vicissitudes; letters from the English girl to
      whom he had briefly referred in his confession to Louvier,—the only girl he had ever wooed as
      his wife. She was the only daughter of highborn Roman Catholics, residing at the time of his
      youth in Paris. Reluctantly they had assented to his proposals; joyfully they had retracted
      their assent when his affairs had become so involved; yet possibly the motive that led him to
      his most ruinous excesses—the gambling of the turf—had been caused by the wild hope of a
      nature, then fatally sanguine, to retrieve the fortune that might suffice to satisfy the
      parents. But during his permitted courtship the lovers had corresponded. Her letters were full
      of warm, if innocent, tenderness—till came the last cold farewell. The family had long ago
      returned to England; he concluded, of course, that she had married another.</p>
<p>Near to these letters lay the papers which had served to vindicate his honour in that old
      affair, in which the unsought love of another had brought on him shame and affliction. As his
      eye fell on the last, he muttered to him self, “I kept these, to clear my repute. Can I keep
      those, when, if found, they might compromise the repute of her who might have been my wife had
      I been worthy of her? She is doubtless now another’s; or, if dead,—honour never dies.” He
      pressed his lips to the letters with a passionate, lingering, mournful kiss; then, raking up
      the ashes of yesterday’s fire, and rekindling them, he placed thereon those leaves of a
      melancholy romance in his past, and watched them slowly, reluctantly smoulder away into
      tinder. Then he opened a drawer in which lay the only paper of a political character which he
      had preserved. All that related to plots or conspiracies in which his agency had committed
      others, it was his habit to destroy as soon as received. For the sole document thus treasured
      he alone was responsible; it was an outline of his ideal for the future constitution of
      France, accompanied with elaborate arguments, the heads of which his conversation with the
      Incognito made known to the reader. Of the soundness of this political programme, whatever its
      merits or faults (a question on which I presume no judgment), he had an intense conviction. He
      glanced rapidly over its contents, did not alter a word, sealed it up in an envelope,
      inscribed, “My Legacy to my Countrymen.” The papers refuting a calumny relating solely to
      himself he carried into the battle-field, placed next to his heart,—significant of a
      Frenchman’s love of honour in this world—as the relic placed round the neck of Enguerrand by
      his pious brother was emblematic of the Christian hope of mercy in the next.</p>
</div>