
CHAPTER I.
FROM ISAURA CICOGNA TO MADAME DE GRANTMESNIL.
It is many days since I wrote to you, and but for your delightful note just received,
      reproaching me for silence, I should still be under the spell of that awe which certain words
      of M. Savarin were well fitted to produce. Chancing to ask him if he had written to you
      lately, he said, with that laugh of his, good-humouredly ironical, “No, Mademoiselle, I am not
      one of the Facheux whom Moliere has immortalized. If the meeting of lovers should be sacred
      from the intrusion of a third person, however amiable, more sacred still should be the parting
      between an author and his work. Madame de Grantmesnil is in that moment so solemn to a genius
      earnest as hers,—she is bidding farewell to a companion with whom, once dismissed into the
      world, she can never converse familiarly again; it ceases to be her companion when it becomes
      ours. Do not let us disturb the last hours they will pass together.”
These words struck me much. I suppose there is truth in them. I can comprehend that a work
      which has long been all in all to its author, concentrating his thoughts, gathering round it
      the hopes and fears of his inmost heart, dies, as it were, to him when he has completed its
      life for others, and launched it into a world estranged from the solitude in which it was born
      and formed. I can almost conceive that, to a writer like you, the very fame which attends the
      work thus sent forth chills your own love for it. The characters you created in a fairyland,
      known but to yourself, must lose something of their mysterious charm when you hear them
      discussed and cavilled at, blamed or praised, as if they were really the creatures of streets
      and salons.
I wonder if hostile criticism pains or enrages you as it seems to do such other authors as I
      have known. M. Savarin, for instance, sets down in his tablets as an enemy to whom vengeance
      is due the smallest scribbler who wounds his self-love, and says frankly, “To me praise is
      food, dispraise is poison. Him who feeds me I pay; him who poisons me I break on the wheel.”
      M. Savarin is, indeed, a skilful and energetic administrator to his own reputation. He deals
      with it as if it were a kingdom,—establishes fortifications for its defence, enlists soldiers
      to fight for it. He is the soul and centre of a confederation in which each is bound to defend
      the territory of the others, and all those territories united constitute the imperial realm of
      M. Savarin. Don’t think me an ungracious satirist in what I am thus saying of our brilliant
      friend. It is not I who here speak; it is himself. He avows his policy with the naivete which
      makes the charm of his style as writer. “It is the greatest mistake,” he said to me yesterday,
      “to talk of the Republic of Letters. Every author who wins a name is a sovereign in his own
      domain, be it large or small. Woe to any republican who wants to dethrone me!” Somehow or
      other, when M. Savarin thus talks I feel as if he were betraying the cause of, genius. I
      cannot bring myself to regard literature as a craft,—to me it is a sacred mission; and in
      hearing this “sovereign” boast of the tricks by which he maintains his state, I seem to listen
      to a priest who treats as imposture the religion he professes to teach. M. Savarin’s favourite
      eleve now is a young contributor to his journal, named Gustave Rameau. M. Savarin said the
      other day in my hearing, “I and my set were Young France; Gustave Rameau and his set are New
      Paris.”
“And what is the distinction between the one and the other?” asked my American friend, Mrs.
      Morley.
“The set of ‘Young France,’” answered M. Savarin, “had in it the hearty consciousness of
      youth; it was bold and vehement, with abundant vitality and animal spirits; whatever may be
      said against it in other respects, the power of thews and sinews must be conceded to its chief
      representatives. But the set of ‘New Paris’ has very bad health, and very indifferent spirits.
      Still, in its way, it is very clever; it can sting and bite as keenly as if it were big and
      strong. Rameau is the most promising member of the set. He will be popular in his time,
      because he represents a good deal of the mind of his time,—namely, the mind and the time of
      ‘New Paris.’”
Do you know anything of this young Rameau’s writings? You do not know himself, for he told
      me so, expressing a desire, that was evidently very sincere, to find some occasion on which to
      render you his homage. He said this the first time I met him at M. Savarin’s, and before he
      knew how dear to me are yourself and your fame. He came and sat by me after dinner, and won my
      interest at once by asking me if I had heard that you were busied on a new work; and then,
      without waiting for my answer, he launched forth into praises of you, which made a notable
      contrast to the scorn with which he spoke of all your contemporaries,—except indeed M.
      Savarin, who, however, might not have been pleased to hear his favourite pupil style him “a
      great writer in small things.” I spare you his epigrams on Dumas and Victor Hugo and my
      beloved Lamartine. Though his talk was showy, and dazzled me at first, I soon got rather tired
      of it, even the first time we met. Since then I have seen him very often, not only at M.
      Savarin’s, but he calls here at least every other day, and we have become quite good friends.
      He gains on acquaintance so far that one cannot help feeling how much he is to be pitied. He
      is so envious! and the envious must be so unhappy. And then he is at once so near and so far
      from all the things that he envies. He longs for riches and luxury, and can only as yet earn a
      bare competence by his labours. Therefore he hates the rich and luxurious. His literary
      successes, instead of pleasing him, render him miserable by their contrast with the fame of
      the authors whom he envies and assails. He has a beautiful head, of which he is conscious, but
      it is joined to a body without strength or grace. He is conscious of this too,—but it is cruel
      to go on with this sketch. You can see at once the kind of person who, whether he inspire
      affection or dislike, cannot fail to create an interest, painful but compassionate.
You will be pleased to hear that Dr. C. considers my health so improved that I may next year
      enter fairly on the profession for which I was intended and trained. Yet I still feel
      hesitating and doubtful. To give myself wholly up to the art in which I am told I could excel
      must alienate me entirely from the ambition that yearns for fields in which, alas! it may
      perhaps never appropriate to itself a rood for culture,—only wander, lost in a vague
      fairyland, to which it has not the fairy’s birthright. O thou great Enchantress, to whom are
      equally subject the streets of Paris and the realm of Faerie, thou who hast sounded to the
      deeps that circumfluent ocean called “practical human life,” and hast taught the acutest of
      its navigators to consider how far its courses are guided by orbs in heaven,—canst thou solve
      this riddle which, if it perplexes me, must perplex so many? What is the real distinction
      between the rare genius and the commonalty of human souls that feel to the quick all the
      grandest and divinest things which the rare genius places before them, sighing within
      themselves, “This rare genius does but express that which was previously familiar to us, so
      far as thought and sentiment extend”? Nay, the genius itself, however eloquent, never does,
      never can, express the whole of the thought or the sentiment it interprets; on the contrary,
      the greater the genius is, the more it leaves a something of incomplete satisfaction on our
      minds,—it promises so much more than it performs; it implies so much more than it announces. I
      am impressed with the truth of what I thus say in proportion as I re-peruse and re-study the
      greatest writers that have come within my narrow range of reading; and by the greatest writers
      I mean those who are not exclusively reasoners (of such I cannot judge), nor mere poets (of
      whom, so far as concerns the union of words with music, I ought to be able to judge), but the
      few who unite reason and poetry, and appeal at once to the common-sense of the multitude and
      the imagination of the few. The highest type of this union to me is Shakspeare; and I can
      comprehend the justice of no criticism on him which does not allow this sense of incomplete
      satisfaction augmenting in proportion as the poet soars to his highest. I ask again, In what
      consists this distinction between the rare genius and the commonalty of minds that exclaim,
      “He expresses what we feel, but never the whole of what we feel”? Is it the mere power over
      language, a larger knowledge of dictionaries, a finer ear for period and cadence, a more
      artistic craft in casing our thoughts and sentiments in well-selected words? Is it true what
      Buffon says, “that the style is the man”? Is it true what I am told Goethe said, “Poetry is
      form”? I cannot believe this; and if you tell me it is true, then I no longer pine to be a
      writer. But if it be not true, explain to me how it is that the greatest genius is popular in
      proportion as it makes itself akin to us by uttering in better words than we employ that which
      was already within us, brings to light what in our souls was latent, and does but correct,
      beautify, and publish the correspondence which an ordinary reader carries on privately every
      day between himself and his mind or his heart. If this superiority in the genius be but style
      and form, I abandon my dream of being something else than a singer of words by another to the
      music of another. But then, what then? My knowledge of books and art is wonderfully small.
      What little I do know I gather from very few books and from what I hear said by the few worth
      listening to whom I happen to meet; and out of these, in solitude and revery, not by conscious
      effort, I arrive at some results which appear to my inexperience original. Perhaps, indeed,
      they have the same kind of originality as the musical compositions of amateurs who effect a
      cantata or a quartette made up of borrowed details from great masters, and constituting a
      whole so original that no real master would deign to own it. Oh, if I could get you to
      understand how unsettled, how struggling my whole nature at this moment is! I wonder what is
      the sensation of the chrysalis which has been a silkworm, when it first feels the new wings
      stirring within its shell,—wings, alas! they are but those of the humblest and shortest-lived
      sort of moth, scarcely born into daylight before it dies. Could it reason, it might regret its
      earlier life, and say, “Better be the silkworm than the moth.”
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
Have you known well any English people in the course of your life? I say well, for you must
      have had acquaintance with many. But it seems to me so difficult to know an Englishman well.
      Even I, who so loved and revered Mr. Selby,—I, whose childhood was admitted into his
      companionship by that love which places ignorance and knowledge, infancy and age, upon ground
      so equal that heart touches heart, cannot say that I understand the English character to
      anything like the extent to which I fancy I understand the Italian and the French. Between us
      of the Continent and them of the island the British Channel always flows. There is an
      Englishman here to whom I have been introduced, whom I have met, though but seldom, in that
      society which bounds the Paris world to me. Pray, pray tell me, did you ever know, ever meet
      him? His name is Graham Vane. He is the only son, I am told, of a man who was a celebrite in
      England as an orator and statesman, and on both sides he belongs to the haute aristocratic. He
      himself has that indescribable air and mien to which we apply the epithet ‘distinguished.’ In
      the most crowded salon the eye would fix on him, and involuntarily follow his movements. Yet
      his manners are frank and simple, wholly without the stiffness or reserve which are said to
      characterize the English. There is an inborn dignity in his bearing which consists in the
      absence of all dignity assumed. But what strikes me most in this Englishman is an expression
      of countenance which the English depict by the word ‘open,’—that expression which inspires you
      with a belief in the existence of sincerity. Mrs. Morley said of him, in that poetic
      extravagance of phrase by which the Americans startle the English, “That man’s forehead would
      light up the Mammoth Cave.” Do you not know, Eulalie, what it is to us cultivators of art—art
      being the expression of truth through fiction—to come into the atmosphere of one of those
      souls in which Truth stands out bold and beautiful in itself, and needs no idealization
      through fiction? Oh, how near we should be to heaven could we live daily, hourly, in the
      presence of one the honesty of whose word we could never doubt, the authority of whose word we
      could never disobey! Mr. Vane professes not to understand music, not even to care for it,
      except rarely, and yet he spoke of its influence over others with an enthusiasm that half
      charmed me once more back to my destined calling; nay, might have charmed me wholly, but that
      he seemed to think that I—that any public singer—must be a creature apart from the world,—the
      world in which such men live. Perhaps that is true.
