
CHAPTER IV.
The next day, Wednesday, July 6th, commenced one of those eras in the world’s history in
      which private life would vainly boast that it overrules Life Public. How many private lives
      does such a terrible time influence, absorb, darken with sorrow, crush into graves?
It was the day when the Duc de Gramont uttered the fatal speech which determined the die
      between peace and war. No one not at Paris on that day can conceive the popular enthusiasm
      with which that speech was hailed—the greater because the warlike tone of it was not
      anticipated; because there had been a rumour amidst circles the best informed that a speech of
      pacific moderation was to be the result of the Imperial Council. Rapturous indeed were the
      applauses with which the sentences that breathed haughty defiance were hailed by the Assembly.
      The ladies in the tribune rose with one accord, waving their handkerchiefs. Tall, stalwart,
      dark, with Roman features and lofty presence, the Minister of France seemed to say with
      Catiline in the fine tragedy: “Lo! where I stand, I am war!”
Paris had been hungering for some hero of the hour—the Duc de Gramont became at once raised
      to that eminence. All the journals, save the very few which were friendly to peace, because
      hostile to the Emperor, resounded with praise, not only of the speech, but of the speaker. It
      is with a melancholy sense of amusement that one recalls now to mind those organs of public
      opinion—with what romantic fondness they dwelt on the personal graces of the man who had at
      last given voice to the chivalry of France: “The charming gravity of his countenance—the
      mysterious expression of his eye!”
As the crowd poured from the Chambers, Victor de Mauleon and Savarin, who had been among the
      listeners, encountered.
“No chance for my friends the Orleanists now,” said Savarin. “You who mock at all parties
      are, I suppose, at heart for the Republican—small chance, too, for that.”
“I do not agree with you. Violent impulses have quick reactions.”
“But what reaction could shake the Emperor after he returns a conqueror, bringing in his
      pocket the left bank of the Rhine?”
“None—when he does that. Will he do it? Does he himself think he will do it? I doubt—”
“Doubt the French army against the Prussian?”
“Against the German people united—yes, very much.”
“But war will disunite the German people. Bavaria will surely assist us—Hanover will rise
      against the spoliator—Austria at our first successes must shake off her present enforced
      neutrality?”
“You have not been in Germany, and I have. What yesterday was a Prussian army, to-morrow
      will be a German population; far exceeding our own in numbers, in hardihood of body, in
      cultivated intellect, in military discipline. But talk of something else. How is my
      ex-editor—poor Gustave Rameau?”
“Still very weak, but on the mend. You may have him back in his office soon.”
“Impossible! even in his sick-bed his vanity was more vigorous than ever. He issued a
      war-song, which has gone the round of the war journals signed by his own name. He must have
      known very well that the name of such a Tyrtaeus cannot reappear as the editor of Le Sens
      Commun; that in launching his little firebrand he burned all vessels that could waft him back
      to the port he had quitted. But I dare say he has done well for his own interests; I doubt if
      Le Sens Commun can much longer hold its ground in the midst of the prevalent lunacy.”
“What! it has lost subscribers?—gone off in sale already, since it declared for peace?”
“Of course it has; and after the article which, if I live over to-night, will appear
      to-morrow, I should wonder if it sell enough to cover the cost of the print and paper.”
“Martyr to principle! I revere, but I do not envy thee.”
“Martyrdom is not my ambition. If Louis Napoleon be defeated, what then? Perhaps he may be
      the martyr; and the Favres and Gambettas may roast their own eggs on the gridiron they heat
      for his majesty.”
Here an English gentleman, who was the very able correspondent to a very eminent journal,
      and in that capacity had made acquaintance with De Mauleon, joined the two Frenchmen; Savarin,
      however, after an exchange of salutations, went his way.
“May I ask a frank answer to a somewhat rude question, M. le Vicomte?” said the Englishman.
      “Suppose that the Imperial Government had to-day given in their adhesion to the peace party,
      how long would it have been before their orators in the Chamber and their organs in the press
      would have said that France was governed by poltrons?”
“Probably for most of the twenty-four hours. But there are a few who are honest in their
      convictions; of that few I am one.”
“And would have supported the Emperor and his Government?”
“No, Monsieur—I do not say that.”
“Then the Emperor would have turned many friends into enemies, and no enemies into
      friends.”
“Monsieur—you in England know that a party in opposition is not propitiated when the party
      in power steals its measures. Ha!—pardon me, who is that gentleman, evidently your countryman,
      whom I see yonder talking to the Secretary of your Embassy?”
“He.—Mr. Vane-Graham Vane. Do you not know him? He has been much in Paris, attached to our
      Embassy formerly; a clever man—much is expected from him.”
“Ah! I think I have seen him before, but am not quite sure. Did you say Vane? I once knew a
      Monsieur Vane, a distinguished parliamentary orator.”
“That gentleman is his son—would you like to be introduced to him?”
“Not to-day—I am in some hurry.” Here Victor lifted his hat in parting salutation, and as he
      walked away cast at Graham another glance keen and scrutinising. “I have seen that man
      before,” he muttered, “where?—when?—can it be only a family likeness to the father? No, the
      features are different; the profile is—ha!—Mr. Lamb, Mr. Lamb—but why call himself by that
      name?—why disguised?—what can he have to do with poor Louise? Bah—these are not questions I
      can think of now. This war—this war—can it yet be prevented? How it will prostrate all the
      plans my ambition so carefully schemed! Oh!—at least if I were but in the Chamber. Perhaps I
      yet may be before the war is ended—the Clavignys have great interest in their department.”
