<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER V.</head>
<p>And still the weeks glided on: autumn succeeded to summer, the winter to autumn; the season
      of Paris was at its height. The wondrous capital seemed to repay its Imperial embellisher by
      the splendour and the joy of its fetes. But the smiles on the face of Paris were hypocritical
      and hollow. The Empire itself had passed out of fashion. Grave men and impartial observers
      felt anxious. Napoleon had renounced les ideas Napoleoniennes. He was passing into the
      category of constitutional sovereigns, and reigning, not by his old undivided prestige, but by
      the grace of party. The press was free to circulate complaints as to the past and demands as
      to the future, beneath which the present reeled, ominous of earthquake. People asked
      themselves if it were possible that the Empire could co-exist with forms of government not
      imperial, yet not genuinely constitutional, with a majority daily yielding to a minority. The
      basis of universal suffrage was sapped. About this time the articles in the “Sens Commun”
      signed Pierre Firmin were creating not only considerable sensation, but marked effect on
      opinion; and the sale of the journal was immense.</p>
<p>Necessarily the repute and the position of Gustave Rameau, as the avowed editor of this
      potent journal, rose with its success. Nor only his repute and position; bank-notes of
      considerable value were transmitted to him by the publisher, with the brief statement that
      they were sent by the sole proprietor of the paper as the editor’s fair share of profit. The
      proprietor was never named, but Rameau took it for granted that it was M. Lebeau. M. Lebeau he
      had never seen since the day he had brought him the list of contributors, and was then
      referred to the publisher, whom he supposed M. Lebeau had secured, and received the first
      quarter of his salary in advance. The salary was a trifle compared to the extra profits thus
      generously volunteered. He called at Lebeau’s office, and saw only the clerk, who said that
      his chef was abroad.</p>
<p>Prosperity produced a marked change for the better, if not in the substance of Rameau’s
      character, at least in his manners and social converse. He no longer exhibited that restless
      envy of rivals, which is the most repulsive symptom of vanity diseased. He pardoned Isaura her
      success; nay, he was even pleased at it. The nature of her work did not clash with his own
      kind of writing. It was so thoroughly woman like that one could not compare it to a man’s.
      Moreover, that success had contributed largely to the profits by which he had benefited, and
      to his renown as editor of the journal which accorded place to this new-found genius. But
      there was a deeper and more potent cause for sympathy with the success of his fair young
      contributor. He had imperceptibly glided into love with her,—a love very different from that
      with which poor Julie Caumartin flattered herself she had inspired the young poet. Isaura was
      one of those women for whom, even in natures the least chivalric, love, however ardent, cannot
      fail to be accompanied with a certain reverence,—the reverence with which the ancient
      knighthood, in its love for women, honoured the ideal purity of womanhood itself. Till then
      Rameau had never revered any one.</p>
<p>On her side, brought so frequently into communication with the young conductor of the
      journal in which she wrote, Isaura entertained for him a friendly, almost sister-like
      affection.</p>
<p>I do not think that, even if she had never known the Englishman, she would have really
      become in love with Rameau, despite the picturesque beauty of his countenance and the
      congeniality of literary pursuits; but perhaps she might have fancied herself in love with
      him. And till one, whether man or woman, has known real love, fancy is readily mistaken for
      it. But little as she had seen of Graham, and that little not in itself wholly favourable to
      him, she knew in her heart of hearts that his image would never be replaced by one equally
      dear. Perhaps in those qualities that placed him in opposition to her she felt his
      attractions. The poetical in woman exaggerates the worth of the practical in man. Still for
      Rameau her exquisitely kind and sympathizing nature conceived one of those sentiments which in
      woman are almost angel-like. We have seen in her letters to Madame de Grantmesnil that from
      the first he inspired her with a compassionate interest; then the compassion was checked by
      her perception of his more unamiable and envious attributes. But now those attributes, if
      still existent, had ceased to be apparent to her, and the compassion became unalloyed. Indeed,
      it was thus so far increased that it was impossible for any friendly observer to look at the
      beautiful face of this youth, prematurely wasted and worn, without the kindliness of pity. His
      prosperity had brightened and sweetened the expression of that face, but it had not effaced
      the vestiges of decay; rather perhaps deepened them, for the duties of his post necessitated a
      regular labour, to which he had been unaccustomed, and the regular labour necessitated, or
      seemed to him to necessitate, an increase of fatal stimulants. He imbibed absinthe with
      everything he drank, and to absinthe he united opium. This, of course, Isaura knew not, any
      more than she knew of his liaison with the “Ondine” of his muse; she saw only the increasing
      delicacy of his face and form, contrasted by his increased geniality and liveliness of
      spirits, and the contrast saddened her. Intellectually, too, she felt for him compassion. She
      recognized and respected in him the yearnings of a genius too weak to perform a tithe of what,
      in the arrogance of youth, it promised to its ambition. She saw, too, those struggles between
      a higher and a lower self, to which a weak degree of genius united with a strong degree of
      arrogance is so often subjected. Perhaps she overestimated the degree of genius, and what, if
      rightly guided, it could do; but she did, in the desire of her own heavenlier instinct, aspire
      to guide it heavenward. And as if she were twenty years older than himself, she obeyed that
      desire in remonstrating and warning and urging, and the young man took all these “preachments”
      with a pleased submissive patience. Such, as the new year dawned upon the grave of the old
      one, was the position between these two. And nothing more was heard from Graham Vane.</p>
</div>