
CHAPTER V.
The letter from Lady Janet, which the Duchess took from the desk and placed in Graham’s
      hand, was in strange coincidence with the subject that for the last twenty-four hours had
      absorbed his thoughts and tortured his heart. Speaking of him in terms of affectionate eulogy,
      the writer proceeded to confide her earnest wish that he should not longer delay that change
      in life which, concentrating so much that is vague in the desires and aspirations of man,
      leaves his heart and his mind, made serene by the contentment of home, free for the steadfast
      consolidation of their warmth and their light upon the ennobling duties that unite the
      individual to his race.
“There is no one,” wrote Lady Janet, “whose character and career a felicitous choice in
      marriage can have greater influence over than this dear adopted son of mine. I do not fear
      that in any case he will be liable to the errors of his brilliant father. His early reverse of
      fortune here seems to me one of those blessings which Heaven conceals in the form of
      affliction. For in youth, the genial freshness of his gay animal spirits, a native generosity
      mingled with desire of display and thirst for applause, made me somewhat alarmed for his
      future. But, though he still retains these attributes of character, they are no longer
      predominant; they are modified and chastened. He has learned prudence. But what I now fear
      most for him is that which he does not show in the world, which neither Leopold nor you seem
      to detect,—it is an exceeding sensitiveness of pride. I know not how else to describe it. It
      is so interwoven with the highest qualities, that I sometimes dread injury to them could it be
      torn away from the faultier ones which it supports.
“It is interwoven with that lofty independence of spirit which has made him refuse openings
      the most alluring to his ambition; it communicates a touching grandeur to his self-denying
      thrift; it makes him so tenacious of his word once given, so cautious before he gives it.
      Public life to him is essential; without it he would be incomplete; and yet I sigh to think
      that whatever success he may achieve in it will be attended with proportionate pain. Calumny
      goes side by side with fame, and courting fame as a man, he is as thin-skinned to calumny as a
      woman.
“The wife for Graham should have qualities, not taken individually, uncommon in English
      wives, but in combination somewhat rare.
“She must have mind enough to appreciate his—not to clash with it. She must be fitted with
      sympathies to be his dearest companion, his confidante in the hopes and fears which the
      slightest want of sympathy would make him keep ever afterwards pent within his breast. In
      herself worthy of distinction, she must merge all distinction in his. You have met in the
      world men who, marrying professed beauties, or professed literary geniuses, are spoken of as
      the husband of the beautiful Mrs. A———, or of the clever Mrs. B———-: can you fancy Graham Vane
      in the reflected light of one of those husbands? I trembled last year when I thought he was
      attracted by a face which the artists raved about, and again by a tongue which dropped bons
      mots that went the round of the club. I was relieved, when, sounding him, he said, laughingly,
      ‘No, dear aunt, I should be one sore from head to foot if I married a wife that was talked
      about for anything but goodness.’
“No,—Graham Vane will have pains sharp enough if he live to be talked about himself. But
      that tenderest half of himself, the bearer of the name he would make, and for the dignity of
      which he alone would be responsible,—if that were the town talk, he would curse the hour he
      gave any one the right to take on herself his man’s burden of calumny and fame. I know not
      which I should pity the most, Graham Vane or his wife.
“Do you understand me, dearest Eleanor? No doubt you do so far, that you comprehend that the
      women whom men most admire are not the women we, as women ourselves, would wish our sons or
      brothers to marry. But perhaps you do not comprehend my cause of fear, which is this—for in
      such matters men do not see as we women do—Graham abhors, in the girls of our time, frivolity
      and insipidity. Very rightly, you will say. True, but then he is too likely to be allured by
      contrasts. I have seen him attracted by the very girls we recoil from more than we do from
      those we allow to be frivolous and insipid. I accused him of admiration for a certain young
      lady whom you call ‘odious,’ and whom the slang that has come into vogue calls ‘fast;’ and I
      was not satisfied with his answer, ‘Certainly I admire her; she is not a doll—she has ideas.’
      I would rather of the two see Graham married to what men call a doll, than to a girl with
      ideas which are distasteful to women.”
Lady Janet then went on to question the Duchess about a Miss Asterisk, with whom this tale
      will have nothing to do, but who, from the little which Lady Janet had seen of her, might
      possess all the requisites that fastidious correspondent would exact for the wife of her
      adopted son.
This Miss Asterisk had been introduced into the London world by the Duchess. The Duchess had
      replied to Lady Janet, that if earth could be ransacked, a more suitable wife for Graham Vane
      than Miss Asterisk could not be found; she was well born—an heiress; the estates she inherited
      were in the county of—(viz., the county in which the ancestors of D’Altons and Vanes had for
      centuries established their whereabout). Miss Asterisk was pretty enough to please any man’s
      eye, but not with the beauty of which artists rave; well informed enough to be companion to a
      well-informed man, but certainly not witty enough to supply bons mots to the clubs. Miss
      Asterisk was one of those women of whom a husband might be proud, yet with whom a husband
      would feel safe from being talked about.
And in submitting the letter we have read to Graham’s eye, the Duchess had the cause of Miss
      Asterisk pointedly in view. Miss Asterisk had confided to her friend, that, of all men she had
      seen, Mr. Graham Vane was the one she would feel the least inclined to refuse.
So when Graham Vane returned the letter to the Duchess, simply saying, “How well my dear
      aunt divined what is weakest in me!” the Duchess replied quickly, “Miss Asterisk dines here
      to-morrow; pray come; you would like her if you knew more of her.”
“To-morrow I am engaged—an American friend of mine dines with me; but ‘tis no matter, for I
      shall never feel more for Miss Asterisk than I feel for Mont Blanc.”
