
CHAPTER I.
A few weeks after the date of the preceding chapter, a gay party of men were assembled at
      supper in one of the private salons of the Maison Doree. The supper was given by Frederic
      Lemercier, and the guests were, though in various ways, more or less distinguished. Rank and
      fashion were not unworthily represented by Alain de Rochebriant and Enguerrand de Vandemar, by
      whose supremacy as “lion” Frederic still felt rather humbled, though Alain had contrived to
      bring them familiarly together. Art, Literature, and the Bourse had also their representatives
      in Henri Bernard, a rising young portrait-painter, whom the Emperor honoured with his
      patronage, the Vicomte de Braze, and M. Savarin. Science was not altogether forgotten, but
      contributed its agreeable delegate in the person of the eminent physician to whom we have been
      before introduced,—Dr. Bacourt. Doctors in Paris are not so serious as they mostly are in
      London; and Bacourt, a pleasant philosopher of the school of Aristippus, was no unfrequent nor
      ungenial guest at any banquet in which the Graces relaxed their zones. Martial glory was also
      represented at that social gathering by a warrior, bronzed and decorated, lately arrived from
      Algiers, on which arid soil he had achieved many laurels and the rank of Colonel. Finance
      contributed Duplessis. Well it might; for Duplessis had just assisted the host to a splendid
      coup at the Bourse.
“Ah, cher Monsieur Savarin,” says Enguerrand de Vandemar, whose patrician blood is so pure
      from revolutionary taint that he is always instinctively polite, “what a masterpiece in its
      way is that little paper of yours in the ‘Sens Commun,’ upon the connection between the
      national character and the national diet! so genuinely witty!—for wit is but truth made
      amusing.”
“You flatter me,” replied Savarin, modestly; “but I own I do think there is a smattering of
      philosophy in that trifle. Perhaps, however, the character of a people depends more on its
      drinks than its food. The wines of Italy, heady, irritable, ruinous to the digestion,
      contribute to the character which belongs to active brains and disordered livers. The Italians
      conceive great plans, but they cannot digest them. The English common-people drink beer, and
      the beerish character is stolid, rude, but stubborn and enduring. The English middle-class
      imbibe port and sherry; and with these strong potations their ideas become obfuscated. Their
      character has no liveliness; amusement is not one of their wants; they sit at home after
      dinner and doze away the fumes of their beverage in the dulness of domesticity. If the English
      aristocracy are more vivacious and cosmopolitan, it is thanks to the wines of France, which it
      is the mode with them to prefer; but still, like all plagiarists, they are imitators, not
      inventors; they borrow our wines and copy our manners. The Germans—”
“Insolent barbarians!” growled the French Colonel, twirling his mustache; “if the Emperor
      were not in his dotage, their Sadowa would ere this have cost them their Rhine.”
“The Germans,” resumed Savarin, unheeding the interruption, “drink acrid wines, varied with
      beer, to which last their commonalty owes a quasi resemblance in stupidity and endurance to
      the English masses. Acrid wines rot the teeth Germans are afflicted with toothache from
      infancy. All people subject to toothache are sentimental. Goethe was a martyr to toothache.
      ‘Werther’ was written in one of those paroxysms which predispose genius to suicide. But the
      German character is not all toothache; beer and tobacco step in to the relief of Rhenish
      acridities, blend philosophy with sentiment, and give that patience in detail which
      distinguishes their professors and their generals. Besides, the German wines in themselves
      have other qualities than that of acridity. Taken with sourkrout and stewed prunes, they
      produce fumes of self-conceit. A German has little of French vanity; he has German
      self-esteem. He extends the esteem of self to those around him; his home, his village, his
      city, his country,—all belong to him. It is a duty he owes to himself to defend them. Give him
      his pipe and his sabre, and, Monsieur le Colonel, believe me, you will never take the Rhine
      from him.”
“P-r-r,” cried the Colonel; “but we have had the Rhine.”
“We did not keep it. And I should not say I had a francpiece if I borrowed it from your
      purse and had to give it back the next day.”
Here there arose a very general hubbub of voices, all raised against M. Savarin. Enguerrand,
      like a man of good ton, hastened to change the conversation.
“Let us leave these poor wretches to their sour wines and toothaches. We drinkers of the
      champagne, all our own, have only pity for the rest of the human race. This new journal ‘Le
      Sens Commun’ has a strange title, Monsieur Savarin.”
“Yes; ‘Le Sens Commun’ is not common in Paris, where we all have too much genius for a thing
      so vulgar.”
“Pray,” said the young painter, “tell me what you mean by the title ‘Le Sens Commun.’ It is
      mysterious.”
“True,” said Savarin; “it may mean the Sensus communis of the Latins, or the Good Sense of
      the English. The Latin phrase signifies the sense of the common interest; the English phrase,
      the sense which persons of understanding have in common. I suppose the inventor of our title
      meant the latter signification.”
“And who was the inventor?” asked Bacourt.
“That is a secret which I do not know myself,” answered Savarin.
“I guess,” said Enguerrand, “that it must be the same person who writes the political
      leaders. They are most remarkable; for they are so unlike the articles in other journals,
      whether those journals be the best or the worst. For my own part, I trouble my head very
      little about politics, and shrug my shoulders at essays which reduce the government of flesh
      and blood into mathematical problems. But these articles seem to be written by a man of the
      world, and as a man of the world myself, I read them.”
“But,” said the Vicomte de Breze, who piqued himself on the polish of his style, “they are
      certainly not the composition of any eminent writer. No eloquence, no sentiment; though I
      ought not to speak disparagingly of a fellow-contributor.”
“All that may be very true;” said Savarin; “but M. Enguerrand is right. The papers are
      evidently the work of a man of the world, and it is for that reason that they have startled
      the public, and established the success of ‘Le Sens Commun.’ But wait a week or two longer,
      Messieurs, and then tell me what you think of a new roman by a new writer, which we shall
      announce in our impression to-morrow. I shall be disappointed, indeed, if that does not charm
      you. No lack of eloquence and sentiment there.”
“I am rather tired of eloquence and sentiment,” said Enguerrand. “Your editor, Gustave
      Rameau, sickens me of them with his ‘Starlit Meditations in the Streets of Paris,’ morbid
      imitations of Heine’s enigmatical ‘Evening Songs.’ Your journal would be perfect if you could
      suppress the editor.”
“Suppress Gustave Rameau!” cried Bernard, the painter; “I adore his poems, full of heart for
      poor suffering humanity.”
“Suffering humanity so far as it is packed up in himself,” said the physician, dryly,—“and a
      great deal of the suffering is bile. But a propos of your new journal, Savarin, there is a
      paragraph in it to-day which excites my curiosity. It says that the Vicomte de Mauleon has
      arrived in Paris, after many years of foreign travel; and then, referring modestly enough to
      the reputation for talent which he had acquired in early youth, proceeds to indulge in a
      prophecy of the future political career of a man who, if he have a grain of sens common, must
      think that the less said about him the better. I remember him well; a terrible mauvais sujet,
      but superbly handsome. There was a shocking story about the jewels of a foreign duchess, which
      obliged him to leave Paris.”
“But,” said Savarin, “the paragraph you refer to hints that that story is a groundless
      calumny, and that the true reason for De Mauleon’s voluntary self-exile was a very common one
      among young Parisians,—he had lavished away his fortune. He returns, when, either by heritage
      or his own exertions, he has secured elsewhere a competence.”
“Nevertheless I cannot think that society will receive him,” said Bacourt. “When he left
      Paris, there was one joyous sigh of relief among all men who wished to avoid duels, and keep
      their wives out of temptation. Society may welcome back a lost sheep, but not a reinvigorated
      wolf.”
“I beg your pardon, mon cher,” said Enguerrand; “society has already opened its fold to this
      poor ill-treated wolf. Two days ago Louvier summoned to his house the surviving relations or
      connections of De Mauleon—among whom are the Marquis de Rochebriant, the Counts de Passy, De
      Beauvilliers, De Chavigny, my father, and of course his two sons—and submitted to us the
      proofs which completely clear the Vicomte de Mauleon of even a suspicion of fraud or dishonour
      in the affair of the jewels. The proofs include the written attestation of the Duke himself,
      and letters from that nobleman after De Mauleon’s disappearance from Paris, expressive of
      great esteem, and indeed, of great admiration, for the Vicomte’s sense of honour and
      generosity of character. The result of this family council was that we all went in a body to
      call on De Mauleon; and he dined with my father that same day. You know enough of the Comte de
      Vandemar, and, I may add, of my mother, to be sure that they are both, in their several ways,
      too regardful of social conventions to lend their countenance even to a relation without well
      weighing the pros and cons. And as for Raoul, Bayard himself could not be a greater stickler
      on the point of honour.”
This declaration was followed by a silence that had the character of stupor.
At last Duplessis said, “But what has Louvier to do in this galere? Louvier is no relation
      of that well-born vaurien; why should he summon your family council?”
“Louvier excused his interference on the ground of early and intimate friendship with De
      Mauleon, who, he said, came to consult him on arriving at Paris, and who felt too proud or too
      timid to address relations with whom he had long dropped all intercourse. An intermediary was
      required, and Louvier volunteered to take that part on himself; nothing more natural nor more
      simple. By the way, Alain, you dine with Louvier to-morrow, do you not?—a dinner in honour of
      our rehabilitated kinsman. I and Raoul go.”
“Yes, I shall be charmed to meet again a man who, whatever might be his errors in youth, on
      which,” added Alain, slightly colouring, “it certainly does not become me to be severe, must
      have suffered the most poignant anguish a man of honour can undergo,—namely, honour suspected;
      and who now, whether by years or sorrow, is so changed that I cannot recognize a likeness to
      the character I have just heard given to him as mauvais sujet and vaurien.”
“Bravo!” cried Enguerrand; “all honour to courage!—and at Paris it requires great courage to
      defend the absent.”
“Nay,” answered Alain, in a low voice. “The gentilhomme who will not defend another
      gentilhomme traduced, would, as a soldier, betray a citadel and desert a flag.”
“You say M. de Mauleon is changed,” said De Breze; “yes, he must be growing old. No trace
      left of his good looks?”
“Pardon me,” said Enguerrand; “he is bien conserve, and has still a very handsome head and
      an imposing presence. But one cannot help doubting whether he deserved the formidable
      reputation he acquired in youth; his manner is so singularly mild and gentle, his conversation
      so winningly modest, so void of pretence, and his mode of life is as simple as that of a
      Spanish hidalgo.”
“He does not, then, affect the role of Monte Cristo,” said Duplessis, “and buy himself into
      notice like that hero of romance?”
“Certainly not: he says very frankly that he has but a very small income, but more than
      enough for his wants,—richer than in his youth, for he has learned content. We may dismiss the
      hint in ‘Le Sens Commun’ about his future political career,—at least he evinces no such
      ambition.”
“How could he as a Legitimist?” said Alain, bitterly. “What department would elect him?”
“But is he a Legitimist?” asked De Breze.
“I take it for granted that he must be that,” answered Alain, haughtily, “for he is a De
      Mauleon.”
“His father was as good a De Mauleon as himself, I presume,” rejoined De Breze, dryly; “and
      he enjoyed a place at the Court of Louis Philippe, which a Legitimist could scarcely accept.
      Victor did not, I fancy, trouble his head about politics at all, at the time I remember him;
      but to judge by his chief associates, and the notice he received from the Princes of the House
      of Orleans, I should guess that he had no predilections in favour of Henri V.”
“I should regret to think so,” said Alain, yet more haughtily, “since the De Mauleons
      acknowledge the head of their house in the representative of the Rochebriants.”
“At all events,” said Duplessis, “M. de Mauleon appears to be a philosopher of rare stamp. A
      Parisian who has known riches and is contented to be poor is a phenomenon I should like to
      study.”
“You have that chance to-morrow evening, Monsieur Duplessis,” said Enguerrand.
“What! at M. Louvier’s dinner? Nay, I have no other acquaintance with M. Louvier than that
      of the Bourse, and the acquaintance is not cordial.”
“I did not mean at M. Louvier’s dinner, but at the Duchesse de Tarascon’s ball. You, as one
      of her special favourites, will doubtless honour her reunion.”
“Yes; I have promised my daughter to go to the ball. But the Duchesse is Imperialist. M. de
      Mauleon seems to be either a Legitimist, according to Monsieur le Marquis, or an Orleanist,
      according to our friend De Breze.”
“What of that? Can there be a more loyal Bourbonite than De Rochebriant?—and he goes to the
      ball. It is given out of the season, in celebration of a family marriage. And the Duchesse de
      Tarascon is connected with Alain, and therefore with De Mauleon, though but distantly.”
“Ah! excuse my ignorance of genealogy.”
“As if the genealogy of noble names were not the history of France,” muttered Alain,
      indignantly.
