
CHAPTER VII.
Left alone with Gustave Rameau, the President of the Secret Council remained silently musing
      for some moments; but his countenance was no longer moody and overcast,—his nostrils were
      dilated, as in triumph; there was a half-smile of pride on his lips. Rameau watched him
      curiously and admiringly. The young man had the impressionable, excitable temperament common
      to Parisian genius,—especially when it nourishes itself on absinthe. He enjoyed the romance of
      belonging to a secret society; he was acute enough to recognize the sagacity by which this
      small conclave was kept out of those crazed combinations for impracticable theories more
      likely to lead adventurers to the Tarpeian Rock than to the Capitol, while yet those crazed
      combinations might, in some critical moment, become strong instruments in the hands of
      practical ambition. Lebeau fascinated him, and took colossal proportions in his intoxicated
      vision,—vision indeed intoxicated at this moment, for before it floated the realized image of
      his aspirations,—a journal of which he was to be the editor-in-chief; in which his poetry, his
      prose, should occupy space as large as he pleased; through which his name, hitherto scarce
      known beyond a literary clique, would resound in salon and club and cafe, and become a
      familiar music on the lips of fashion. And he owed this to the man seated there,—a prodigious
      man.
“Cher poete,” said Lebeau, breaking silence, “it gives me no mean pleasure to think I am
      opening a career to one whose talents fit him for those goals on which they who reach write
      names that posterity shall read. Struck with certain articles of yours in the journal made
      celebrated by the wit and gayety of Savarin, I took pains privately to inquire into your
      birth, your history, connections, antecedents. All confirmed my first impression,—that you
      were exactly the writer I wish to secure to our cause. I therefore sought you in your rooms,
      unintroduced and a stranger, in order to express my admiration of your compositions. Bref, we
      soon became friends; and after comparing minds, I admitted you, at your request, into this
      Secret Council. Now, in proposing to you the conduct of the journal I would establish, for
      which I am prepared to find all necessary funds, I am compelled to make imperative conditions.
      Nominally you will be editor-in-chief: that station, if the journal succeeds, will secure you
      position and fortune; if it fail, you fail with it. But we will not speak of failure; I must
      have it succeed. Our interest, then, is the same. Before that interest all puerile vanities
      fade away. Nominally, I say, you are editor-in-chief; but all the real work of editing will,
      at first, be done by others.”
“Ah!” exclaimed Rameau, aghast and stunned. Lebeau resumed,
“To establish the journal I propose needs more than the genius of youth; it needs the tact
      and experience of mature years.”
Rameau sank back on his chair with a sullen sneer on his pale lips. Decidedly Lebeau was not
      so great a man as he had thought.
“A certain portion of the journal,” continued Lebeau, “will be exclusively appropriated to
      your pen.”
Rameau’s lip lost the sneer.
“But your pen must be therein restricted to compositions of pure fancy, disporting in a
      world that does not exist; or, if on graver themes connected with the beings of the world that
      does exist, the subjects will be dictated to you and revised. Yet even in the higher
      departments of a journal intended to make way at its first start, we need the aid, not indeed
      of men who write better than you, but of men whose fame is established,—whose writings, good
      or bad, the public run to read, and will find good even if they are bad. You must consign one
      column to the playful comments and witticisms of Savarin.”
“Savarin? But he has a journal of his own. He will not, as an author, condescend to write in
      one just set up by me; and as a politician, he as certainly will not aid in an ultrademocratic
      revolution. If he care for politics at all, he is a constitutionalist, an Orleanist.”
“Enfant! as an author Savarin will condescend to contribute to your journal, first, because
      it in no way attempts to interfere with his own; secondly,—I can tell you a secret, Savarin’s
      journal no longer suffices for his existence. He has sold more than two-thirds of its
      property; he is in debt, and his creditor is urgent; and to-morrow you will offer Savarin
      thirty thousand francs for one column from his pen, and signed by his name, for two months
      from the day the journal starts. He will accept, partly because the sum will clear off the
      debt that hampers him, partly because he will take care that the amount becomes known; and
      that will help him to command higher terms for the sale of the remaining shares in the journal
      he now edits, for the new book which you told me he intended to write, and for the new journal
      which he will be sure to set up as soon as he has disposed of the old one. You say that, as a
      politician, Savarin, an Orleanist, will not aid in an ultra-democratic revolution. Who asks
      him to do so? Did I not imply at the meeting that we commence our journal with politics the
      mildest? Though revolutions are not made with rose-water, it is rose-water that nourishes
      their roots. The polite cynicism of authors, read by those who float on the surface of
      society, prepares the way for the social ferment in its deeps. Had there been no Voltaire,
      there would have been no Camille Desmoulins; had there been no Diderot, there would have been
      no Marat. We start as polite cynics. Of all cynics Savarin is the politest. But when I bid
      high for him, it is his clique that I bid for. Without his clique he is but a wit; with his
      clique, a power. Partly out of that clique, partly out of a circle beyond it, which Savarin
      can more or less influence, I select ten. Here is the list of them; study it. Entre nous, I
      esteem their writings as little as I do artificial flies; but they are the artificial flies at
      which, in this particular season of the year, the public rise. You must procure at least five
      of the ten; and I leave you carte blanche as to the terms. Savarin gained, the best of them
      will be proud of being his associates. Observe, none of these messieurs of brilliant
      imagination are to write political articles; those will be furnished to you anonymously, and
      inserted without erasure or omission. When you have secured Savarin, and five at least of the
      collaborateurs in the list, write to me at my office. I give you four days to do this; and the
      day the journal starts you enter into the income of fifteen thousand francs a year, with a
      rise in salary proportioned to profits. Are you contented with the terms?”
“Of course I am; but supposing I do not gain the aid of Savarin, or five at least of the
      list you give, which I see at a glance contains names the most a la mode in this kind of
      writing, more than one of them of high social rank, whom it is difficult for me even to
      approach,—if, I say, I fail?”
“What! with a carte blanche of terms? fie! Are you a Parisian? Well, to answer you frankly,
      if you fail in so easy a task, you are not the man to edit our journal, and I shall find
      another. Allez, courage! Take my advice; see Savarin the first thing to-morrow morning. Of
      course, my name and calling you will keep a profound secret from him, as from all. Say as
      mysteriously as you can that parties you are forbidden to name instruct you to treat with M.
      Savarin, and offer him the terms I have specified, the thirty thousand francs paid to him in
      advance the moment he signs the simple memorandum of agreement. The more mysterious you are,
      the more you will impose,—that is, wherever you offer money and don’t ask for it.”
Here Lebeau took up his hat, and, with a courteous nod of adieu, lightly descended the
      gloomy stairs.
