
CHAPTER VI.
That evening Graham found himself in the coupe of the express train to Strasbourg. He had
      sent to engage the whole coupe to himself, but that was impossible. One place was bespoken as
      far as C———-, after which Graham might prosecute his journey alone on paying for the three
      places.
When he took his seat another man was in the further corner whom he scarcely noticed. The
      train shot rapidly on for some leagues. Profound silence in the coupe, save at moments those
      heavy impatient sighs that came from the very depths of the heart, and of which he who sighs
      is unconscious, burst from the Englishman’s lips, and drew on him the observant side-glance of
      his fellow-traveller.
At length the fellow-traveller said in very good English, though with French accent, “Would
      you object, sir, to my lighting my little carriage-lantern? I am in the habit of reading in
      the night train, and the wretched lamp they give us does not permit that. But if you wish to
      sleep, and my lantern would prevent you doing so, consider my request unasked.”
“You are most courteous, sir. Pray light your lantern—that will not interfere with my
      sleep.”
As Graham thus answered, far away from the place and the moment as his thoughts were, it yet
      faintly struck him that he had heard that voice before.
The man produced a small lantern, which he attached to the window-sill, and drew forth from
      a small leathern bag sundry newspapers and pamphlets. Graham flung himself back, and in a
      minute or so again came his sigh.
“Allow me to offer you those evening journals—you may not have had time to read them before
      starting,” said the fellow-traveller, leaning forward, and extending the newspapers with one
      hand, while with the other he lifted his lantern. Graham turned, and the faces of the two men
      were close to each other—Graham with his travelling-cap drawn over his brows, the other with
      head uncovered.
“Monsieur Lebeau!”
“Bon soir, Mr. Lamb!”
Again silence for a moment or so. Monsieur Lebeau then broke it—
“I think, Mr. Lamb, that in better society than that of the Faubourg Montmartre you are
      known under another name.” Graham had no heart then for the stage-play of a part, and
      answered, with quiet haughtiness, “Possibly—and what name?”
“Graham Vane. And, sir,” continued Lebeau, with a haughtiness equally quiet, but somewhat
      more menacing, “since we two gentlemen find ourselves thus close, do I ask too much if I
      inquire why you condescend to seek my acquaintance in disguise?”
“Monsieur le Vicomte de Mauleon, when you talk of disguise, is it too much to inquire why my
      acquaintance was accepted by Monsieur Lebeau?”
“Ha! Then you confess that it was Victor de Mauleon whom you sought when you first visited
      the cafe Jean Jacques?”
“Frankly I confess it.”
Monsieur Lebeau drew himself back, and seemed to reflect.
“I see! Solely for the purpose of learning whether Victor de Mauleon could give you any
      information about Louise Duval. Is it so?”
“Monsieur le Vicomte, you say truly.”
Again M. Lebeau paused as if in reflection; and Graham, in that state of mind when a man who
      may most despise and detest the practice of duelling, may yet feel a thrill of delight if some
      homicide would be good enough to put him out of his misery, flung aside his cap, lifted his
      broad frank forehead, and stamped his foot impatiently as if to provoke a quarrel.
M. Lebeau lowered his spectacles, and, with those calm, keen, searching eyes of his, gazed
      at the Englishman.
“It strikes me,” he said, with a smile, the fascination of which not even those faded
      whiskers could disguise—“it strikes me that there are two ways in which gentlemen such as you
      and I are can converse: firstly, with reservation and guard against each other; secondly, with
      perfect openness. Perhaps of the two I have more need of reservation and wary guard against
      any stranger than you have. Allow me to propose the alternative—perfect openness. What say
      you?” and he extended his hand.
“Perfect openness,” answered Graham, softened into sudden liking for this once terrible
      swordsman, and shaking, as an Englishman shakes, the hand held out to him in peace by the man
      from whom he had anticipated quarrel.
“Permit me now, before you address any questions to me, to put one to you. How did you learn
      that Victor de Mauleon was identical with Jean Lebeau?”
“I heard that from an agent of the police.”
“Ah!”
“Whom I consulted as to the means of ascertaining whether Louise Duval was alive,—if so,
      where she could be found.”
“I thank you very much for your information. I had no notion that the police of Paris had
      divined the original alias of poor Monsieur Lebeau, though something occurred at Lyons which
      made me suspect it. Strange that the Government, knowing through the police that Victor de
      Mauleon, a writer they had no reason to favour, had been in so humble a position, should
      never, even in their official journals, have thought it prudent to say so! But, now I think of
      it, what if they had? They could prove nothing against Jean Lebeau. They could but say, ‘Jean
      Lebeau is suspected to be too warm a lover of liberty, too earnest a friend of the people, and
      Jean Lebeau is the editor of La Sens Commun.’ Why, that assertion would have made Victor de
      Mauleon the hero of the Reds, the last thing a prudent Government could desire. I thank you
      cordially for your frank reply. Now, what question would you put to me?”
“In one word, all you can tell me about Louise Duval.”
“You shall have it. I had heard vaguely in my young days that a half-sister of mine by my
      father’s first marriage with Mademoiselle de Beauvilliers had—when in advanced middle life he
      married a second time—conceived a dislike for her mother-in-law, and, being of age, with an
      independent fortune of her own, had quitted the house, taken up her residence with an elderly
      female relative, and there had contracted a marriage with a man who gave her lessons in
      drawing. After that marriage, which my father in vain tried to prevent, my sister was
      renounced by her family. That was all I knew till, after I came into my inheritance by the
      death of both my parents, I learned from my father’s confidential lawyer that the
      drawing-master, M. Duval, had soon dissipated his wife’s fortune, become a widower with one
      child—a girl—and fallen into great distress. He came to my father, begging for pecuniary aid.
      My father, though by no means rich, consented to allow him a yearly pension, on condition that
      he never revealed to his child her connection with our family. The man agreed to the
      condition, and called at my father’s lawyer quarterly for his annuity. But the lawyer informed
      me that this deduction from my income had ceased, that M. Duval had not for a year called or
      sent for the sum due to him, and that he must therefore be dead. One day my valet informed me
      that a young lady wished to see me—in those days young ladies very often called on me. I
      desired her to be shown in. There entered a young creature, almost of my own age, who, to my
      amazement saluted me as uncle. This was the child of my half-sister. Her father had been dead
      several months, fulfilling very faithfully the condition on which he had held his pension, and
      the girl never dreaming of the claims that, if wise, poor child, she ought not to have cared
      for, viz.,—to that obsolete useless pauper birthright, a branch on the family tree of a French
      noble. But in pinch of circumstance, and from female curiosity, hunting among the papers her
      father had left for some clue to the reasons for the pension he had received, she found
      letters from her mother, letters from my father, which indisputably proved that she was
      grandchild to the fue Vicomte de Mauleon, and niece to myself. Her story as told to me was
      very pitiable. Conceiving herself to be nothing higher in birth than daughter to this
      drawing-master, at his death, poor, penniless orphan that she was, she had accepted the hand
      of an English student of medicine whom she did not care for. Miserable with this man, on
      finding by the documents I refer to that she was my niece, she came to me for comfort and
      counsel. What counsel could I or any man give to her but to make the best of what had
      happened, and live with her husband? But then she started another question. It seems that she
      had been talking with some one, I think her landlady, or some other woman with whom she had
      made acquaintance—was she legally married to this man? Had he not entrapped her ignorance into
      a false marriage? This became a grave question, and I sent at once to my lawyer. On hearing
      the circumstances, he at once declared that the marriage was not legal according to the laws
      of France. But, doubtless, her English soi-disant husband was not cognisant of the French law,
      and a legal marriage could, with his assent, be at once solemnised. Monsieur Vane, I cannot
      find words to convey to you the joy that poor girl showed in her face and in her words when
      she learned that she was not bound to pass her life with that man as his wife. It was in vain
      to talk and reason with her. Then arose the other question, scarcely less important. True, the
      marriage was not legal, but would it not be better on all accounts to take steps to have it
      formally annulled, thus freeing her from the harassment of any claim the Englishman might
      advance, and enabling her to establish the facts in a right position, not injurious to her
      honour in the eyes of any future suitor to her hand? She would not hear of such a proposal.
      She declared that she could not bring to the family she pined to re-enter the scandal of
      disgrace. To allow that she had made such a misalliance would be bad enough in itself; but to
      proclaim to the world that, though nominally the wife, she had in fact been only the mistress
      of this medical student—she would rather throw herself into the Seine. All she desired was to
      fund some refuge, some hiding-place for a time, whence she could write to the man informing
      him that he had no lawful hold on her. Doubtless he would not seek then to molest her. He
      would return to his own country, and be effaced from her life. And then, her story unknown,
      she might form a more suitable alliance. Fiery young creature though she was—true De Mauleon
      in being so fiery—she interested me strongly. I should say that she was wonderfully handsome;
      and though imperfectly educated, and brought up in circumstances so lowly, there was nothing
      common about her—a certain je ne sais quoi of stateliness and race. At all events she did with
      me what she wished. I agreed to aid her desire of a refuge and hiding-place. Of course I could
      not lodge her in my own apartment, but I induced a female relation of her mother’s, an old
      lady living at Versailles, to receive her, stating her birth, but of course concealing her
      illegal marriage.
“From time to time I went to see her. But one day I found this restless bright-plumaged bird
      flown. Among the ladies who visited at her relative’s house was a certain Madame Marigny, a
      very pretty young widow. Madame Marigny and Louise formed a sudden and intimate friendship.
      The widow was moving from Versailles into an apartment at Paris, and invited Louise to share
      it. She had consented. I was not pleased at this; for the widow was too young, and too much of
      a coquette, to be a safe companion to Louise. But though professing much gratitude and great
      regard for me, I had no power of controlling the poor girl’s actions. Her nominal husband,
      meanwhile, had left France, and nothing more was heard or known of him. I saw that the best
      thing that could possibly befall Louise was marriage with some one rich enough to gratify her
      taste for luxury and pomp; and that if such a marriage offered itself, she might be induced to
      free it from all possible embarrassment by procuring the annulment of the former, from which
      she had hitherto shrunk in such revolt. This opportunity presented itself. A man already rich,
      and in a career that promised to make him infinitely richer, an associate of mine in those
      days when I was rapidly squandering the remnant of my inheritance—this man saw her at the
      opera in company with Madame Marigny, fell violently in love with her, and ascertaining her
      relationship to me, besought an introduction. I was delighted to give it; and, to say the
      truth, I was then so reduced to the bottom of my casket, I felt that it was becoming
      impossible for me to continue the aid I had hitherto given to Louise, and—what then would
      become of her? I thought it fair to tell Louvier—”
“Louvier—the financier?”
“Ah, that was a slip of the tongue, but no matter; there is no reason for concealing his
      name. I thought it right, I say, to tell Louvier confidentially the history of the unfortunate
      illegal marriage. It did not damp his ardour. He wooed her to the best of his power, but she
      evidently took him into great dislike. One day she sent for me in much excitement, showed me
      some advertisements in the French journals which, though not naming her, evidently pointed at
      her, and must have been dictated by her soi-disant husband. The advertisements might certainly
      lead to her discovery if she remained in Paris. She entreated my consent to remove elsewhere.
      Madame Marigny had her own reason for leaving Paris, and would accompany her. I supplied her
      with the necessary means, and a day or two afterwards she and her friend departed, as I
      understood, for Brussels. I received no letter from her; and my own affairs so seriously
      pre-occupied me, that poor Louise might have passed altogether out of my thoughts, had it not
      been for the suitor she had left in despair behind. Louvier besought me to ascertain her
      address; but I could give him no, other clue to it than that she said she was going to
      Brussels, but should soon remove to some quiet village. It was not for a long time—I can’t
      remember how long—it might be several weeks, perhaps two or three months, that I received a
      short note from her stating that she waited for a small remittance, the last she would accept
      from me, as she was resolved, so soon as her health would permit, to find means to maintain
      herself—and telling me to direct to her, Poste restante, Aix-la-Chapelle. I sent her the sum
      she asked, perhaps a little more, but with a confession reluctantly wrung from me that I was a
      ruined man; and I urged her to think very seriously before she refused the competence and
      position which a union with M. Louvier would insure.
“This last consideration so pressed on me that, when Louvier called on me, I think that day
      or the nests I gave him Louise’s note, and told him that, if he were still as much in love
      with her as ever, les absents ont toujours tort, and he had better go to Aix-la-Chapelle and
      find her out; that he had my hearty approval of his wooing, and consent to his marriage,
      though I still urged the wisdom and fairness, if she would take the preliminary step—which,
      after all, the French law frees as much as possible from pain and scandal—of annulling the
      irregular marriage into which her childlike youth had been decoyed.
“Louvier left me for Aix-la-Chapelle. The very next day came that cruel affliction which
      made me a prey to the most intolerable calumny, which robbed me of every friend, which sent me
      forth from my native country penniless, and resolved to be nameless—until—until—well, until my
      hour could come again—every dog, if not hanged, has its day;—when that affliction befell me, I
      quitted France, heard no more of Louvier nor of Louise; indeed, no letter addressed to me at
      Paris would have reached—”
The man paused here, evidently with painful emotion. He resumed in the quiet matter-of-fact
      way in which he had commenced his narrative.
“Louise had altogether faded out of my remembrance until your question revived it. As it
      happened, the question came at the moment when I meditated resuming my real name and social
      position. In so doing, I should of course come in contact with my old acquaintance Louvier;
      and the name of Louise was necessarily associated with us. I called on him, and made myself
      known. The slight information I gave you as to my niece was gleaned from him.
“I may now say more. It appears that when he arrived at Aix-la-Chapelle he found that Louise
      Duval had left it a day or two previously, and according to scandal had been for some time
      courted by a wealthy and noble lover, whom she had gone to Munich to meet. Louvier believed
      this tale: quitted Aix indignantly, and never heard more of her. The probability is, M. Vane,
      that she must have been long dead. But if living still, I feel quite sure that she will
      communicate with me some day or other. Now that I have reappeared in Paris in my own
      name—entered into a career that, for good or for evil, must ere long bring my name very
      noisily before the public—Louise cannot fail to hear of my existence and my whereabouts; and
      unless I am utterly mistaken as to her character, she will assuredly inform me of her own.
      Oblige me with your address, and in that case I will let you know. Of course I take for
      granted the assurance you gave me last year, that you only desire to discover her in order to
      render her some benefit, not to injure or molest her?”
“Certainly. To that assurance I pledge my honour. Any letter with which you may favour me
      had better be directed to my London address; here is my card. But, M. le Vicomte, there is one
      point on which pray pardon me if I question you still. Had you no suspicion that there was one
      reason why this lady might have quitted Paris so hastily, and have so shrunk from the thought
      of a marriage so advantageous, in a worldly point of view, as that with M. Louvier,—namely,
      that she anticipated the probability of becoming the mother of a child by the man whom she
      refused to acknowledge as a husband?”
“That idea did not strike me until you asked me if she had a child. Should your conjecture
      be correct, it would obviously increase her repugnance to apply for the annulment of her
      illegal marriage. But if Louise is still living and comes across me, I do not doubt that, the
      motives for concealment no longer operating, she will confide to me the truth. Since we have
      been talking together thus frankly, I suppose I may fairly ask whether I do not guess
      correctly in supposing that this soi-disant husband, whose name I forget,—Mac—something,
      perhaps, Scotch-I think she said he was Ecossais,—is dead and has left by will some legacy to
      Louise and any child she may have borne to him?”
“Not exactly so. The man, as you say, is dead; but he bequeathed no legacy to the lady who
      did not hold herself married to him. But there are those connected with him who, knowing the
      history, think that some compensation is due for the wrong so unconsciously done to her, and
      yet more to any issue of a marriage not meant to be irregular or illegal. Permit me now to
      explain why I sought you in another guise and name than my own. I could scarcely place in M.
      Lebeau the confidence which I now unreservedly place in the Vicomte de Mauleon.”
“Cela va sans dire. You believed, then, that calumny about the jewels; you do not believe it
      now?”
“Now! my amazement is, that any one who had known you could believe it.”
“Oh, how often, and with tears of rage in my exile—my wanderings—have I asked that question
      of myself! That rage has ceased; and I have but one feeling left for that credulous, fickle
      Paris, of which one day I was the idol, the next the byword. Well, a man sometimes plays chess
      more skilfully for having been long a mere bystander. He understands better how to move, and
      when to sacrifice the pieces. Politics, M. Vane, is the only exciting game left to me at my
      years. At yours, there is still that of love. How time flies! we are nearing the station at
      which I descend. I have kinsfolk of my mother’s in these districts. They are not Imperialists;
      they are said to be powerful in the department. But before I apply to them in my own name, I
      think it prudent that M. Lebeau should quietly ascertain what is their real strength, and what
      would be the prospects of success if Victor de Mauleon offered himself as depute at the next
      election. Wish him joy, M. Vane! If he succeed, you will hear of him some day crowned in the
      Capitol, or hurled from the Tarpeian rock.”
Here the train stopped. The false Lebeau gathered up his papers, readjusted his spectacles
      and his bag, descended lightly, and, pressing Graham’s hand as he paused at the door, said,
      “Be sure I will not forget your address if I have anything to say. Bon voyage!”
