<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER I.</head>
<p>Amoung the frets and checks to the course that “never did run smooth,” there is one which is
      sufficiently frequent, for many a reader will remember the irritation it caused him. You have
      counted on a meeting with the beloved one unwitnessed by others, an interchange of confessions
      and vows which others may not hear. You have arranged almost the words in which your innermost
      heart is to be expressed; pictured to yourself the very looks by which those words will have
      their sweetest reply. The scene you have thus imagined appears to you vivid and distinct, as
      if foreshown in a magic glass. And suddenly, after long absence, the meeting takes place in
      the midst of a common companionship: nothing that you wished to say can be said. The scene you
      pictured is painted out by the irony of Chance; and groups and backgrounds of which you had
      never dreamed start forth from the disappointing canvas. Happy if that be all! But sometimes,
      by a strange, subtle intuition, you feel that the person herself is changed; and sympathetic
      with that change, a terrible chill comes over your own heart.</p>
<p>Before Graham had taken his seat at the table beside Isaura, he felt that she was changed to
      him. He felt it by her very touch as their hands met at the first greeting,—by the tone of her
      voice in the few words that passed between them,—by the absence of all glow in the smile which
      had once lit up her face, as a burst of sunshine lights up a day in spring, and gives a richer
      gladness of colour to all its blooms. Once seated side by side they remained for some moments
      silent. Indeed, it would have been rather difficult for anything less than the wonderful
      intelligence of lovers between whom no wall can prevent the stolen interchange of tokens, to
      have ventured private talk of their own amid the excited converse which seemed all eyes, all
      tongues, all ears, admitting no one present to abstract himself from the common emotion.
      Englishmen do not recognise the old classic law which limited the number of guests, where
      banquets are meant to be pleasant, to that of the Nine-Muses. They invite guests so numerous,
      and so shy of launching talk across the table, that you may talk to the person next to you not
      less secure from listeners than you would be in talking with the stranger whom you met at a
      well in the Sahara. It is not so, except on state occasions, at Paris. Difficult there to
      retire into solitude with your next neighbour. The guests collected by Duplessis completed
      with himself the number of the Sacred Nine—the host, Valerie, Rochebriant, Graham, Isaura,
      Signora Venosta, La Duchesse de Tarascon, the wealthy and high-born Imperialist, Prince ————,
      and last and least, one who shall be nameless.</p>
<p>I have read somewhere, perhaps in one of the books which American superstition dedicates to
      the mysteries of Spiritualism, how a gifted seer, technically styled medium, sees at the opera
      a box which to other eyes appears untenanted and empty, but to him is full of ghosts, well
      dressed in costume de-regle, gazing on the boards and listening to the music. Like such ghosts
      are certain beings whom I call Lookers-on. Though still living, they have no share in the life
      they survey, they come as from another world to hear and to see what is passing in ours. In
      ours they lived once, but that troubled sort of life they have survived. Still we amuse them
      as stage-players and puppets amuse ourselves. One of these Lookers-on completed the party at
      the house of Duplessis.</p>
<p>How lively, how animated the talk was at the financier’s pleasant table that day, the 8th of
      July! The excitement of the coming war made itself loud in every Gallic voice, and kindled in
      every Gallic eye. Appeals at every second minute were made, sometimes courteous, sometimes
      sarcastic, to the Englishman—promising son of an eminent statesman, and native of a country in
      which France is always coveting an ally, and always suspecting an enemy. Certainly Graham
      could not have found a less propitious moment for asking Isaura if she really were changed.
      And certainly the honour of Great Britain was never less ably represented (that is saying a
      great deal) than it was on this occasion by the young man reared to diplomacy and aspiring to
      Parliamentary distinction. He answered all questions with a constrained voice and an insipid
      smile,—all questions pointedly addressed to him as to what demonstrations of admiring sympathy
      with the gallantry of France might be expected from the English Government and people; what
      his acquaintance with the German races led him to suppose would be the effect on the Southern
      States of the first defeat of the Prussians; whether the man called Moltke was not a mere
      strategist on paper, a crotchety pedant; whether, if Belgium became so enamoured of the
      glories of France as to solicit fusion with her people, England would have a right to offer
      any objection,etc., etc. I do not think that during that festival Graham once thought
      one-millionth so much about the fates of Prussia and France as he did think, “Why is that girl
      so changed to me? Merciful heaven! is she lost to my life?”</p>
<p>By training, by habit, even by passion, the man was a genuine politician, cosmopolitan as
      well as patriotic, accustomed to consider what effect every vibration in that balance of
      European power, which no deep thinker can despise, must have on the destinies of civilised
      humanity, and on those of the nation to which he belongs. But are there not moments in life
      when the human heart suddenly narrows the circumference to which its emotions are extended? As
      the ebb of a tide, it retreats from the shores it had covered on its flow, drawing on with
      contracted waves the treasure-trove it has selected to hoard amid its deeps.</p>
</div>