<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER IV.</head>
<p>The weeks glided on. Isaura’s manuscript bad passed into print; it came out in the French
      fashion of feuilletons,—a small detachment at a time. A previous flourish of trumpets by
      Savarin and the clique at his command insured it attention, if not from the general public, at
      least from critical and literary coteries. Before the fourth instalment appeared it had
      outgrown the patronage of the coteries; it seized hold of the public. It was not in the last
      school in fashion; incidents were not crowded and violent,—they were few and simple, rather
      appertaining to an elder school, in which poetry of sentiment and grace of diction prevailed.
      That very resemblance to old favourites gave it the attraction of novelty. In a word, it
      excited a pleased admiration, and great curiosity was felt as to the authorship. When it oozed
      out that it was by the young lady whose future success in the musical world had been so
      sanguinely predicted by all who had heard her sing, the interest wonderfully increased.
      Petitions to be introduced to her acquaintance were showered upon Savarin. Before she scarcely
      realized her dawning fame, she was drawn from her quiet home and retired habits; she was fetee
      and courted in the literary circle of which Savarin was a chief. That circle touched, on one
      side, Bohemia; on the other, that realm of politer fashion which, in every intellectual
      metropolis, but especially in Paris, seeks to gain borrowed light from luminaries in art and
      letters. But the very admiration she obtained somewhat depressed, somewhat troubled her; after
      all, it did not differ from that which was at her command as a singer.</p>
<p>On the one hand, she shrank instinctively from the caresses of female authors and the
      familiar greetings of male authors, who frankly lived in philosophical disdain of the
      conventions respected by sober, decorous mortals. On the other hand, in the civilities of
      those who, while they courted a rising celebrity, still held their habitual existence apart
      from the artistic world, there was a certain air of condescension, of patronage, towards the
      young stranger with no other protector but Signora Venosta, the ci-devant public singer, and
      who had made her debut in a journal edited by M. Gustave Rameau, which, however disguised by
      exaggerated terms of praise, wounded her pride of woman in flattering her vanity as author.
      Among this latter set were wealthy, high-born men, who addressed her as woman—as woman
      beautiful and young—with words of gallantry that implied love, but certainly no thought of
      marriage,—many of the most ardent were indeed married already. But once launched into the
      thick of Parisian hospitalities, it was difficult to draw back. The Venosta wept at the
      thought of missing some lively soiree, and Savarin laughed at her shrinking fastidiousness as
      that of a child’s ignorance of the world. But still she had her mornings to herself; and in
      those mornings, devoted to the continuance of her work (for the commencement was in print
      before a third was completed), she forgot the commonplace world that received her in the
      evenings. Insensibly to herself the tone of this work had changed as it proceeded. It had
      begun seriously indeed, but in the seriousness there was a certain latent joy. It might be the
      joy of having found vent of utterance; it might be rather a joy still more latent, inspired by
      the remembrance of Graham’s words and looks, and by the thought that she had renounced all
      idea of the professional career which he had evidently disapproved. Life then seemed to her a
      bright possession. We have seen that she had begun her roman without planning how it should
      end. She had, however, then meant it to end, somehow or other, happily. Now the lustre had
      gone from life; the tone of the work was saddened; it foreboded a tragic close. But for the
      general reader it became, with every chapter, still more interesting; the poor child had a
      singularly musical gift of style,—a music which lent itself naturally to pathos. Every very
      young writer knows how his work, if one of feeling, will colour itself from the views of some
      truth in his innermost self; and in proportion as it does so, how his absorption in the work
      increases, till it becomes part and parcel of his own mind and heart. The presence of a hidden
      sorrow may change the fate of the beings he has created, and guide to the grave those whom, in
      a happier vein, he would have united at the altar. It is not till a later stage of experience
      and art that the writer escapes from the influence of his individual personality, and lives in
      existences that take no colourings from his own. Genius usually must pass through the
      subjective process before it gains the objective. Even a Shakspeare represents himself in the
      Sonnets before no trace of himself is visible in a Falstaff or a Lear.</p>
<p>No news of the Englishman,—not a word. Isaura could not but feel that in his words, his
      looks, that day in her own garden, and those yet happier days at Enghien, there had been more
      than friendship; there had been love,—love enough to justify her own pride in whispering to
      herself, “And I love too.” But then that last parting! how changed he was! how cold! She
      conjectured that jealousy of Rameau might, in some degree, account for the coldness when he
      first entered the room, but surely not when he left; surely not when she had overpassed the
      reserve of her sex, and implied by signs rarely misconstrued by those who love that he had no
      cause for jealousy of another. Yet he had gone,—parted with her pointedly as a friend, a mere
      friend. How foolish she had been to think this rich ambitious foreigner could ever have meant
      to be more! In the occupation of her work she thought to banish his image; but in that work
      the image was never absent; there were passages in which she pleadingly addressed it, and then
      would cease abruptly, stifled by passionate tears. Still she fancied that the work would
      reunite them; that in its pages he would hear her voice and comprehend her heart. And thus all
      praise of the work became very, very dear to her.</p>
<p>At last, after many weeks, Savarin heard from Graham. The letter was dated Aix-la-Chapelle,
      at which the Englishman said he might yet be some time detained. In the letter Graham spoke
      chiefly of the new journal: in polite compliment of Savarin’s own effusions; in mixed praise
      and condemnation of the political and social articles signed Pierre Firmin,—praise of their
      intellectual power, condemnation of their moral cynicism.</p>
<quote>
<l> “The writer,” he said, “reminds me of a passage in which Montesquieu compares the heathen
      philosophers to those plants which the earth produces in places that have never seen the
      heavens. The soil of his experience does not grow a single belief; and as no community can
      exist without a belief of some kind, so a politician without belief can but help to destroy;
      he cannot reconstruct. Such writers corrupt a society; they do not reform a system.”
      </l></quote>
<p>He closed his letter with a reference to Isaura:</p>
<quote>
<l> “Do, in your reply, my dear Savarin, tell me something about your friends Signora Venosta
      and the Signorina, whose work, so far as yet published, I have read with admiring astonishment
      at the power of a female writer so young to rival the veteran practitioners of fiction in the
      creation of interest in imaginary characters, and in sentiments which, if they appear somewhat
      over-romantic and exaggerated, still touch very fine chords in human nature not awakened in
      our trite every-day existence. I presume that the beauty of the roman has been duly
      appreciated by a public so refined as the Parisian, and that the name of the author is
      generally known. No doubt she is now much the rage of the literary circles, and her career as
      a writer may be considered fixed. Pray present my congratulations to the Signorina when you
      see her.” </l></quote>
<p>Savarin had been in receipt of this letter some days before he called on Isaura, and
      carelessly showed it to her. She took it to the window to read, in order to conceal the
      trembling of her hands. In a few minutes she returned it silently.</p>
<p>“Those Englishmen,” said Savarin, “have not the heart of compliment. I am by no means
      flattered by what he says of my trifles, and I dare say you are still less pleased with this
      chilly praise of your charming tale; but the man means to be civil.”</p>
<p>“Certainly,” said Isaura, smiling faintly.</p>
<p>“Only think of Rameau!” resumed Savarin. “On the strength of his salary in the ‘Sens
      Commun,’ and on the chateaux en Espagne which he constructs thereon, he has already furnished
      an apartment in the Chaussee d’Antin, and talks of setting up a coupe in order to maintain the
      dignity of letters when he goes to dine with the duchesses who are some day or other to invite
      him. Yet I admire his self-confidence, though I laugh at it. A man gets on by a spring in his
      own mechanism, and he should always keep it wound up. Rameau will make a figure. I used to
      pity him; I begin to respect. Nothing succeeds like success. But I see I am spoiling your
      morning. Au revoir, mon enfant.”</p>
<p>Left alone, Isaura brooded in a sort of mournful wonderment over the words referring to
      herself in Graham’s letter. Read though but once, she knew them by heart. What! did he
      consider those characters she had represented as wholly imaginary? In one—the most prominent,
      the most attractive—could he detect no likeness to himself? What! did he consider so
      “over-romantic and exaggerated” sentiments which couched appeals from her heart to his? Alas!
      in matters of sentiment it is the misfortune of us men that even the most refined of us often
      grate upon some sentiment in a woman, though she may not be romantic,—not romantic at all, as
      people go,—some sentiment which she thought must be so obvious if we cared a straw about her,
      and which, though we prize her above the Indies, is by our dim, horn-eyed, masculine vision
      undiscernible. It may be something in itself the airiest of trifles: the anniversary of a day
      in which the first kiss was interchanged, nay, of a violet gathered, a misunderstanding
      cleared up; and of that anniversary we remember no more than we do of our bells and coral. But
      she—she remembers it; it is no bells and coral to her. Of course, much is to be said in excuse
      of man, brute though he be. Consider the multiplicity of his occupations, the practical nature
      of his cares. But granting the validity of all such excuse, there is in man an original
      obtuseness of fibre as regards sentiment in comparison with the delicacy of woman’s. It comes,
      perhaps, from the same hardness of constitution which forbids us the luxury of ready tears.
      Thus it is very difficult for the wisest man to understand thoroughly a woman. Goethe says
      somewhere that the highest genius in man must have much of the woman in it. If this be true,
      the highest genius alone in man can comprehend and explain the nature of woman, because it is
      not remote from him, but an integral part of his masculine self. I am not sure, however, that
      it necessitates the highest genius, but rather a special idiosyncrasy in genius which the
      highest may or may not have. I think Sophocles a higher genius than Euripides; but Euripides
      has that idiosyncrasy, and Sophocles not. I doubt whether women would accept Goethe as their
      interpreter with the same readiness with which they would accept Schiller. Shakspeare, no
      doubt, excels all poets in the comprehension of women, in his sympathy with them in the
      woman-part of his nature which Goethe ascribes to the highest genius; but, putting aside that
      “monster,” I do not remember any English poet whom we should consider conspicuously eminent in
      that lore, unless it be the prose poet, nowadays generally underrated and little read, who
      wrote the letters of Clarissa Harlowe. I say all this in vindication of Graham Vane, if,
      though a very clever man in his way, and by no means uninstructed in human nature, he had
      utterly failed in comprehending the mysteries which to this poor woman-child seemed to need no
      key for one who really loved her. But we have said somewhere before in this book that music
      speaks in a language which cannot explain itself except in music. So speaks, in the human
      heart, much which is akin to music. Fiction (that is, poetry, whether in form of rhyme or
      prose) speaks thus pretty often. A reader must be more commonplace than, I trust, my gentle
      readers are, if he suppose that when Isaura symbolized the real hero of her thoughts in the
      fabled hero of her romance, she depicted him as one of whom the world could say, “That is
      Graham Vane.” I doubt if even a male poet would so vulgarize any woman whom he thoroughly
      reverenced and loved. She is too sacred to him to be thus unveiled to the public stare; as the
      sweetest of all ancient love-poets says well—</p>
<quote>
<l> “Qui sapit in tacito gaudeat ille sinu.” </l></quote>
<p>But a girl, a girl in her first untold timid love, to let the world know, “that is the man I
      love and would die for!”—if such a girl be, she has no touch of the true woman-genius, and
      certainly she and Isaura have nothing in common. Well, then, in Isaura’s invented hero, though
      she saw the archetypal form of Graham Vane,—saw him as in her young, vague, romantic dreams
      idealized, beautified, transfigured,—he would have been the vainest of men if he had seen
      therein the reflection of himself. On the contrary he said, in the spirit of that jealousy to
      which he was too prone, “Alas! this, then, is some ideal, already seen perhaps, compared to
      which how commonplace am I!” and thus persuading himself, no wonder that the sentiments
      surrounding this unrecognized archetype appeared to him over-romantic. His taste acknowledged
      the beauty of form which clothed them; his heart envied the ideal that inspired them. But they
      seemed so remote from him; they put the dreamland of the writer farther and farther from his
      workday real life.</p>
<p>In this frame of mind, then, he had written to Savarin, and the answer he received hardened
      it still more. Savarin had replied, as was his laudable wont in correspondence, the very day
      he received Graham’s letter, and therefore before he had even seen Isaura. In his reply, he
      spoke much of the success her work had obtained; of the invitations showered upon her, and the
      sensation she caused in the salons; of her future career, with hope that she might even rival
      Madame de Grantmesnil some day, when her ideas became emboldened by maturer experience, and a
      closer study of that model of eloquent style,—saying that the young editor was evidently
      becoming enamoured of his fair contributor; and that Madame Savarin had ventured the
      prediction that the Signorina’s roman would end in the death of the heroine, and the marriage
      of the writer.</p>
</div>