<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER III.</head>
<head>FROM ISAURA CICOGNA TO MADAME DE GRANTMESNIL.</head>
<p>The day after I posted my last, Mr. Vane called on us. I was in our little garden at the
      time. Our conversation was brief, and soon interrupted by visitors,—the Savarins and M.
      Rameau. I long for your answer. I wonder how he impressed you, if you have met him; how he
      would impress, if you met him now. To me he is so different from all others; and I scarcely
      know why his words ring in my ears, and his image rests in my thoughts. It is strange
      altogether; for though he is young, he speaks to me as if he were so much older than I,—so
      kindly, so tenderly, yet as if I were a child, and much as the dear Maestro might do, if he
      thought I needed caution or counsel. Do not fancy, Eulalie, that there is any danger of my
      deceiving myself as to the nature of such interest as he may take in me. Oh, no! There is a
      gulf between us there which he does not lose sight of, and which we could not pass. How,
      indeed, I could interest him at all, I cannot guess. A rich, high-born Englishman, intent on
      political life; practical, prosaic—no, not prosaic; but still with the kind of sense which
      does not admit into its range of vision that world of dreams which is familiar as their daily
      home to Romance and to Art. It has always seemed to me that for love, love such as I conceive
      it, there must be a deep and constant sympathy between two persons,—not, indeed, in the usual
      and ordinary trifles of taste and sentiment, but in those essentials which form the root of
      character, and branch out in all the leaves and blooms that expand to the sunshine and shrink
      from the cold,—that the worldling should wed the worldling, the artist the artist. Can the
      realist and the idealist blend together, and hold together till death and beyond death? If
      not, can there be true love between them?</p>
<p>By true love, I mean the love which interpenetrates the soul, and once given can never die.
      Oh, Eulalie, answer me, answer!</p>
<p>P. S.—I have now fully made up my mind to renounce all thought of the stage.</p>
<p>FROM MADAME DE GRANTMESNIL TOISAURA CICOGNA.</p>
<p>MY DEAR CHILD,—how your mind has grown since you left me, the sanguine and aspiring votary
      of an art which, of all arts, brings the most immediate reward to a successful cultivator, and
      is in itself so divine in its immediate effects upon human souls! Who shall say what may be
      the after-results of those effects which the waiters on posterity presume to despise because
      they are immediate? A dull man, to whose mind a ray of that vague starlight undetected in the
      atmosphere of workday life has never yet travelled; to whom the philosopher, the preacher, the
      poet appeal in vain,—nay, to whom the conceptions of the grandest master of instrumental music
      are incomprehensible; to whom Beethoven unlocks no portal in heaven; to whom Rossini has no
      mysteries on earth unsolved by the critics of the pit,—suddenly hears the human voice of the
      human singer, and at the sound of that voice the walls which enclosed him fall. The something
      far from and beyond the routine of his commonplace existence becomes known to him. He of
      himself, poor man, can make nothing of it. He cannot put it down on paper, and say the next
      morning, “I am an inch nearer to heaven than I was last night;” but the feeling that he is an
      inch nearer to heaven abides with him. Unconsciously he is gentler, he is less earthly, and,
      in being nearer to heaven, he is stronger for earth. You singers do not seem to me to
      understand that you have—to use your own word, so much in vogue that it has become abused and
      trite—a mission! When you talk of missions, from whom comes the mission? Not from men. If
      there be a mission from man to men, it must be appointed from on high.</p>
<p>Think of all this; and in being faithful to your art, be true to yourself. If you feel
      divided between that art and the art of the writer, and acknowledge the first to be too
      exacting to admit a rival, keep to that in which you are sure to excel. Alas, my fair child!
      do not imagine that we writers feel a happiness in our pursuits and aims more complete than
      that which you can command. If we care for fame (and, to be frank, we all do), that fame does
      not come up before us face to face, a real, visible, palpable form, as it does to the singer,
      to the actress. I grant that it may be more enduring, but an endurance on the length of which
      we dare not reckon. A writer cannot be sure of immortality till his language itself be dead;
      and then he has but a share in an uncertain lottery. Nothing but fragments remains of the
      Phrynichus who rivalled AEschylus; of the Agathon who perhaps excelled Euripides; of the
      Alcaeus, in whom Horace acknowledged a master and a model; their renown is not in their works,
      it is but in their names. And, after all, the names of singers and actors last perhaps as
      long. Greece retains the name of Polus, Rome of Roscius, England of Garrick, France of Talma,
      Italy of Pasta, more lastingly than posterity is likely to retain mine. You address to me a
      question, which I have often put to myself,—“What is the distinction between the writer and
      the reader, when the reader says, ‘These are my thoughts, these are my feelings; the writer
      has stolen them, and clothed them in his own words’?” And the more the reader says this, the
      more wide is the audience, the more genuine the renown, and, paradox though it seems, the more
      consummate the originality, of the writer. But no, it is not the mere gift of expression, it
      is not the mere craft of the pen, it is not the mere taste in arrangement of word and cadence,
      which thus enables the one to interpret the mind, the heart, the soul of the many. It is a
      power breathed into him as he lay in his cradle, and a power that gathered around itself, as
      he grew up, all the influences he acquired, whether from observation of external nature, or
      from study of men and books, or from that experience of daily life which varies with every
      human being. No education could make two intellects exactly alike, as no culture can make two
      leaves exactly alike. How truly you describe the sense of dissatisfaction which every writer
      of superior genius communicates to his admirers! how truly do you feel that the greater is the
      dissatisfaction in proportion to the writer’s genius, and the admirer’s conception of it! But
      that is the mystery which makes—let me borrow a German phrase—the cloud-land between the
      finite and the infinite. The greatest philosopher, intent on the secrets of Nature, feels that
      dissatisfaction in Nature herself. The finite cannot reduce into logic and criticism the
      infinite.</p>
<p>Let us dismiss these matters, which perplex the reason, and approach that which touches the
      heart, which in your case, my child, touches the heart of woman. You speak of love, and deem
      that the love which lasts—the household, the conjugal love—should be based upon such
      sympathies of pursuit that the artist should wed the artist.</p>
<p>This is one of the questions you do well to address to me; for whether from my own
      experience, or from that which I have gained from observation extended over a wide range of
      life, and quickened and intensified by the class of writing that I cultivate, and which
      necessitates a calm study of the passions, I am an authority on such subjects, better than
      most women can be. And alas, my child, I come to this result: there is no prescribing to men
      or to women whom to select, whom to refuse. I cannot refute the axiom of the ancient poet, “In
      love there is no wherefore.” But there is a time—it is often but a moment of time—in which
      love is not yet a master, in which we can say, “I will love, I will not love.”</p>
<p>Now, if I could find you in such a moment, I would say to you, “Artist, do not love, do not
      marry, an artist.” Two artistic natures rarely combine. The artistic nature is wonderfully
      exacting. I fear it is supremely egotistical,—so jealously sensitive that it writhes at the
      touch of a rival. Racine was the happiest of husbands; his wife adored his genius, but could
      not understand his plays. Would Racine have been happy if he had married a Corneille in
      petticoats? I who speak have loved an artist, certainly equal to myself. I am sure that he
      loved me. That sympathy in pursuits of which you speak drew us together, and became very soon
      the cause of antipathy. To both of us the endeavour to coalesce was misery.</p>
<p>I don’t know your M. Rameau. Savarin has sent me some of his writings; from these I judge
      that his only chance of happiness would be to marry a commonplace woman, with separation de
      biens. He is, believe me, but one of the many with whom New Paris abounds, who because they
      have the infirmities of genius imagine they have its strength.</p>
<p>I come next to the Englishman. I see how serious is your questioning about him. You not only
      regard him as a being distinct from the crowd of a salon; he stands equally apart in the
      chamber of your thoughts,—you do not mention him in the same letter as that which treats of
      Rameau and Savarin. He has become already an image not to be lightly mixed up with others. You
      would rather not have mentioned him at all to me, but you could not resist it. The interest
      you feel in him so perplexed you, that in a kind of feverish impatience you cry out to me,
      “Can you solve the riddle? Did you ever know well Englishmen? Can an Englishman be understood
      out of his island?” etc. Yes, I have known well many Englishmen; in affairs of the heart they
      are much like all other men. No; I do not know this Englishman in particular, nor any one of
      his name.</p>
<p>Well, my child, let us frankly grant that this foreigner has gained some hold on your
      thoughts, on your fancy, perhaps also on your heart. Do not fear that he will love you less
      enduringly, or that you will become alienated from him, because he is not an artist. If he be
      a strong nature, and with some great purpose in life, your ambition will fuse itself in his;
      and knowing you as I do, I believe you would make an excellent wife to an Englishman whom you
      honoured as well as loved; and sorry though I should be that you relinquished the singer’s
      fame, I should be consoled in thinking you safe in the woman’s best sphere,—a contented home,
      safe from calumny, safe from gossip. I never had that home; and there has been no part in my
      author’s life in which I would not have given all the celebrity it won for the obscure
      commonplace of such woman-lot. Could I move human beings as pawns on a chessboard, I should
      indeed say that the most suitable and congenial mate for you, for a woman of sentiment and
      genius, would be a well-born and well-educated German; for such a German unites, with domestic
      habits and a strong sense of family ties, a romance of sentiment, a love of art, a
      predisposition towards the poetic side of life, which is very rare among Englishmen of the
      same class. But as the German is not forthcoming, I give my vote for the Englishman, provided
      only you love him. Ah, child, be sure of that. Do not mistake fancy for love. All women do not
      require love in marriage, but without it that which is best and highest in you would wither
      and die. Write to me often and tell me all. M. Savarin is right. My book is no longer my
      companion. It is gone from me, and I am once more alone in the world.</p>
<p>Yours affectionately.</p>
<p>P. S.—Is not your postscript a woman’s? Does it not require a woman’s postscript in reply?
      You say in yours that you have fully made up your mind to renounce all thoughts of the stage.
      I ask in mine, “What has the Englishman to do with that determination?”</p>
</div>