
CHAPTER II.
The salons of the Trois Freres were crowded; our friends found a table with some little
      difficulty. Lemercier proposed a private cabinet, which, for some reason known to himself, the
      Marquis declined.
Lemercier spontaneously and unrequested ordered the dinner and the wines.
While waiting for their oysters, with which, when in season, French ‘bon-vivants’ usually
      commence their dinner, Lemercier looked round the salon with that air of inimitable,
      scrutinizing, superb impertinence which distinguishes the Parisian dandy. Some of the ladies
      returned his glance coquettishly, for Lemercier was ‘beau garcon;’ others turned aside
      indignantly, and muttered something to the gentlemen dining with them. The said gentlemen,
      when old, shook their heads, and continued to eat unmoved; when young, turned briskly round,
      and looked at first fiercely at M. Lemercier, but, encountering his eye through the glass
      which he had screwed into his socket, noticing the hardihood of his countenance and the
      squareness of his shoulders, even they turned back to the tables, shook their heads, and
      continued to eat unmoved, just like the old ones.
“Ah!” cried Lemercier, suddenly, “here comes a man you should know, ‘mon cher.’ He will tell
      you how to place your money,—a rising man, a coming man, a future minister. Ah! ‘bon jour,’
      Duplessis, ‘bon jour,’” kissing his hand to a gentleman who had just entered and was looking
      about him for a seat. He was evidently well and favourably known at the Trois Freres. The
      waiters had flocked round him, and were pointing to a table by the window, which a saturnine
      Englishman, who had dined off a beefsteak and potatoes, was about to vacate.
M. Duplessis, having first assured himself, like a prudent man, that his table was secure,
      having ordered his oysters, his chablis, and his ‘potage a la bisque,’ now paced calmly and
      slowly across the salon, and halted before Lemercier.
Here let me pause for a moment, and give the reader a rapid sketch of the two Parisians.
Frederic Lemercier is dressed, somewhat too showily, in the extreme of the prevalent
      fashion. He wears a superb pin in his cravat,—a pin worth two thousand francs; he wears rings
      on his fingers, ‘breloques’ to his watch-chain. He has a warm though dark complexion, thick
      black eyebrows, full lips, a nose somewhat turned up, but not small, very fine large dark
      eyes, a bold, open, somewhat impertinent expression of countenance; withal decidedly handsome,
      thanks to colouring, youth, and vivacity of regard.
Lucien Duplessis, bending over the table, glancing first with curiosity at the Marquis de
      Rochebriant, who leans his cheek on his hand and seems not to notice him, then concentrating
      his attention on Frederic Lemercier, who sits square with his hands clasped,—Lucien Duplessis
      is somewhere between forty and fifty, rather below the middle height, slender, but not
      slight,—what in English phrase is called “wiry.” He is dressed with extreme simplicity: black
      frockcoat buttoned up; black cravat worn higher than men who follow the fashions wear their
      neckcloths nowadays; a hawk’s eye and a hawk’s beak; hair of a dull brown, very short, and
      wholly without curl; his cheeks thin and smoothly shaven, but he wears a mustache and
      imperial, plagiarized from those of his sovereign, and, like all plagiarisms, carrying the
      borrowed beauty to extremes, so that the points of mustache and imperial, stiffened and
      sharpened by cosmetics which must have been composed of iron, looked like three long stings
      guarding lip and jaw from invasion; a pale olive-brown complexion, eyes small, deep-sunk,
      calm, piercing; his expression of face at first glance not striking, except for quiet
      immovability. Observed more heedfully, the expression was keenly intellectual,—determined
      about the lips, calculating about the brows: altogether the face of no ordinary man, and one
      not, perhaps, without fine and high qualities, concealed from the general gaze by habitual
      reserve, but justifying the confidence of those whom he admitted into his intimacy.
“Ah, mon cher,” said Lemercier, “you promised to call on me yesterday at two o’clock. I
      waited in for you half an hour; you never came.”
“No; I went first to the Bourse. The shares in that Company we spoke of have fallen; they
      will fall much lower: foolish to buy in yet; so the object of my calling on you was over. I
      took it for granted you would not wait if I failed my appointment. Do you go to the opera
      to-night?”
“I think not; nothing worth going for: besides, I have found an old friend, to whom I
      consecrate this evening. Let me introduce you to the Marquis de Rochebriant. Alain, M.
      Duplessis.”
The two gentlemen bowed.
“I had the honour to be known to Monsieur your father,” said Duplessis.
“Indeed,” returned Rochebriant. “He had not visited Paris for many years before he
      died.”
“It was in London I met him, at the house of the Russian Princess C____.”
The Marquis coloured high, inclined his head gravely, and made no reply. Here the waiter
      brought the oysters and the chablis, and Duplessis retired to his own table.
“That is the most extraordinary man,” said Frederic, as he squeezed the lemon over his
      oysters, “and very much to be admired.”
“How so? I see nothing at least to admire in his face,” said the Marquis, with the bluntness
      of a provincial.
“His face. Ah! you are a Legitimist,—party prejudice. He dresses his face after the Emperor;
      in itself a very clever face, surely.”
“Perhaps, but not an amiable one. He looks like a bird of prey.”
“All clever men are birds of prey. The eagles are the heroes, and the owls the sages.
      Duplessis is not an eagle nor an owl. I should rather call him a falcon, except that I would
      not attempt to hoodwink him.”
“Call him what you will,” said the Marquis, indifferently; “M. Duplessis can be nothing to
      me.”
“I am not so sure of that,” answered Frederic, somewhat nettled by the phlegm with which the
      Provincial regarded the pretensions of the Parisian. “Duplessis, I repeat it, is an
      extraordinary man. Though untitled, he descends from your old aristocracy; in fact, I believe,
      as his name shows, from the same stem as the Richelieus. His father was a great scholar, and I
      believe he has read much himself. Might have distinguished himself in literature or at the
      bar, but his parents died fearfully poor; and some distant relations in commerce took charge
      of him, and devoted his talents to the ‘Bourse.’ Seven years ago he lived in a single chamber,
      ‘au quatrieme,’ near the Luxembourg. He has now a hotel, not large but charming, in the Champs
      Elysees, worth at least six hundred thousand francs. Nor has he made his own fortune alone,
      but that of many others; some of birth as high as your own. He has the genius of riches, and
      knocks off a million as a poet does an ode, by the force of inspiration. He is hand-in-glove
      with the Ministers, and has been invited to Compiegne by the Emperor. You will find him very
      useful.”
Alain made a slight movement of incredulous dissent, and changed the conversation to
      reminiscences of old school-boy days.
The dinner at length came to a close. Frederic rang for the bill,—glanced over it.
      “Fifty-nine francs,” said he, carelessly flinging down his napoleon and a half. The Marquis
      silently drew forth his purse and extracted the same sum. When they were out of the
      restaurant, Frederic proposed adjourning to his own rooms. “I can promise you an excellent
      cigar, one of a box given to me by an invaluable young Spaniard attached to the Embassy here.
      Such cigars are not to be had at Paris for money, nor even for love; seeing that women,
      however devoted and generous, never offer you anything better than a cigarette. Such cigars
      are only to be had for friendship. Friendship is a jewel.”
“I never smoke,” answered the Marquis, “but I shall be charmed to come to your rooms; only
      don’t let me encroach on your good-nature. Doubtless you have engagements for the
      evening.”
“None till eleven o’clock, when I have promised to go to a soiree to which I do not offer to
      take you; for it is one of those Bohemian entertainments at which it would do you harm in the
      Faubourg to assist,—at least until you have made good your position. Let me see, is not the
      Duchesse de Tarascon a relation of yours?”
“Yes; my poor mother’s first cousin.”
“I congratulate you. ‘Tres grande dame.’ She will launch you in ‘puro cielo,’ as Juno might
      have launched one of her young peacocks.”
“There has been no acquaintance between our houses,” returned the Marquis, dryly, “since the
      mesalliance of her second nuptials.”
“Mesalliance! second nuptials! Her second husband was the Duc de Tarascon.”
“A duke of the First Empire, the grandson of a butcher.”
“Diable! you are a severe genealogist, Monsieur le Marquis. How can you consent to walk
      arm-in-arm with me, whose great-grandfather supplied bread to the same army to which the Due
      de Tarascon’s grandfather furnished the meat?”
“My dear Frederic, we two have an equal pedigree, for our friendship dates from the same
      hour. I do not blame the Duchesse de Tarascon for marrying the grandson of a butcher, but for
      marrying the son of a man made duke by a usurper. She abandoned the faith of her house and the
      cause of her sovereign. Therefore her marriage is a blot on our scutcheon.”
Frederic raised his eyebrows, but had the tact to pursue the subject no further. He who
      interferes in the quarrels of relations must pass through life without a friend.
The young men now arrived at Lemercier’s apartment, an entresol looking on the Boulevard des
      Italiens, consisting of more rooms than a bachelor generally requires; low-pitched, indeed,
      but of good dimensions, and decorated and furnished with a luxury which really astonished the
      provincial, though, with the high-bred pride of an oriental, he suppressed every sign of
      surprise.
Florentine cabinets, freshly retouched by the exquisite skill of Mombro; costly specimens of
      old Sevres and Limoges; pictures and bronzes and marble statuettes,—all well chosen and of
      great price, reflected from mirrors in Venetian frames,—made a ‘coup d’oeil’ very favourable
      to that respect which the human mind pays to the evidences of money. Nor was comfort less
      studied than splendour. Thick carpets covered the floors, doubled and quilted portieres
      excluded all draughts from chinks in the doors. Having allowed his friend a few minutes to
      contemplate and admire the ‘salle a manger’ and ‘salon’ which constituted his more state
      apartments, Frederic then conducted him into a small cabinet, fitted up with scarlet cloth and
      gold fringes, whereon were artistically arranged trophies of Eastern weapons and Turkish pipes
      with amber mouthpieces.
There, placing the Marquis at ease on a divan and flinging himself on another, the Parisian
      exquisite ordered a valet, well dressed as himself, to bring coffee and liqueurs; and after
      vainly pressing one of his matchless cigars on his friend, indulged in his own Regalia.
“They are ten years old,” said Frederic, with a tone of compassion at Alain’s self-inflicted
      loss,—“ten years old. Born therefore about the year in which we two parted—”
“When you were so hastily summoned from college,” said the Marquis, “by the news of your
      father’s illness. We expected you back in vain. Have you been at Paris ever since?”
“Ever since; my poor father died of that illness. His fortune proved much larger than was
      suspected: my share amounted to an income from investments in stocks, houses, etc., to upwards
      of sixty thousand francs a-year; and as I wanted six years to my majority of course the
      capital on attaining my majority would be increased by accumulation. My mother desired to keep
      me near her; my uncle, who was joint guardian with her, looked with disdain on our poor little
      provincial cottage; so promising an heir should acquire his finishing education under masters
      at Paris. Long before I was of age, I was initiated into politer mysteries of our capital than
      those celebrated by Eugene Sue. When I took possession of my fortune five years ago, I was
      considered a Croesus; and really for that patriarchal time I was wealthy. Now, alas! my
      accumulations have vanished in my outfit; and sixty thousand francs a-year is the least a
      Parisian can live upon. It is not only that all prices have fabulously increased, but that the
      dearer things become, the better people live. When I first came out, the world speculated upon
      me; now, in order to keep my standing, I am forced to speculate on the world. Hitherto I have
      not lost; Duplessis let me into a few good things this year, worth one hundred thousand francs
      or so. Croesus consulted the Delphic Oracle. Duplessis was not alive in the time of Croesus,
      or Croesus would have consulted Duplessis.”
Here there was a ring at the outer door of the apartment, and in another minute the valet
      ushered in a gentleman somewhere about the age of thirty, of prepossessing countenance, and
      with the indefinable air of good-breeding and ‘usage du monde.’ Frederic started up to greet
      cordially the new-comer, and introduced him to the Marquis under the name of “Sare Grarm
      Varn.”
“Decidedly,” said the visitor, as he took off his paletot and seated himself beside the
      Marquis,—“decidedly, my dear Lemercier,” said he, in very correct French, and with the true
      Parisian accent and intonation, “you Frenchmen merit that praise for polished ignorance of the
      language of barbarians which a distinguished historian bestows on the ancient Romans. Permit
      me, Marquis, to submit to you the consideration whether Grarm Varn is a fair rendering of my
      name as truthfully printed on this card.”
The inscription on the card, thus drawn from its case and placed in Alain’s hand, was—

 MR. GRAHAM VANE, No. __ Rue d’Anjou. 
The Marquis gazed at it as he might on a hieroglyphic, and passed it on to Lemercier in
      discreet silence.
That gentleman made another attempt at the barbarian appellation.
“‘Grar—ham Varne.’ ‘C’est ca!’ I triumph! all difficulties yield to French energy.”
Here the coffee and liqueurs were served; and after a short pause the Englishman, who had
      very quietly been observing the silent Marquis, turned to him and said, “Monsieur le Marquis,
      I presume it was your father whom I remember as an acquaintance of my own father at Ems. It is
      many years ago; I was but a child. The Count de Chambord was then at that enervating little
      spa for the benefit of the Countess’s health. If our friend Lemercier does not mangle your
      name as he does mine, I understand him to say that you are the Marquis de Rochebriant.”
“That is my name: it pleases me to hear that my father was among those who flocked to Ems to
      do homage to the royal personage who deigns to assume the title of Count de Chambord.”
“My own ancestors clung to the descendants of James II. till their claims were buried in the
      grave of the last Stuart, and I honour the gallant men who, like your father, revere in an
      exile the heir to their ancient kings.”
The Englishman said this with grace and feeling; the Marquis’s heart warmed to him at
      once.
“The first loyal ‘gentilhome’ I have met at Paris,” thought the Legitimist; “and, oh, shame!
      not a Frenchman!” Graham Vane, now stretching himself and accepting the cigar which Lemercier
      offered him, said to that gentleman “You who know your Paris by heart—everybody and everything
      therein worth the knowing, with many bodies and many things that are not worth it—can you
      inform me who and what is a certain lady who every fine day may be seen walking in a quiet
      spot at the outskirts of the Bois de Boulogne, not far from the Baron de Rothschild’s villa?
      The said lady arrives at this selected spot in a dark-blue coupe without armorial bearings,
      punctually at the hour of three. She wears always the same dress,—a kind of gray
      pearl-coloured silk, with a ‘cachemire’ shawl. In age she may be somewhat about twenty—a year
      or so more or less—and has a face as haunting as a Medusa’s; not, however, a face to turn a
      man into a stone, but rather of the two turn a stone into a man. A clear paleness, with a
      bloom like an alabaster lamp with the light flashing through. I borrow that illustration from
      Sare Scott, who applied it to Milor Bee-ren.”
“I have not seen the lady you describe,” answered Lemercier, feeling humiliated by the
      avowal; “in fact, I have not been in that sequestered part of the Bois for months; but I will
      go to-morrow: three o’clock you say,—leave it to me; to-morrow evening, if she is a
      Parisienne, you shall know all about her. But, mon cher, you are not of a jealous temperament
      to confide your discovery to another.”
“Yes, I am of a very jealous temperament,” replied the Englishman; “but jealousy comes after
      love, and not before it. I am not in love; I am only haunted. To-morrow evening, then, shall
      we dine at Philippe’s, seven o’clock?”
“With all my heart,” said Lemercier; “and you too, Alain?”
“Thank you, no,” said the Marquis, briefly; and he rose, drew on his gloves, and took up his
      hat.
At these signals of departure, the Englishman, who did not want tact nor delicacy, thought
      that he had made himself ‘de trop’ in the ‘tete-a-tete’ of two friends of the same age and
      nation; and, catching up his paletot, said hastily, “No, Marquis, do not go yet, and leave our
      host in solitude; for I have an engagement which presses, and only looked in at Lemercier’s
      for a moment, seeing the light at his windows. Permit me to hope that our acquaintance will
      not drop, and inform me where I may have the honour to call on you.”
“Nay,” said the Marquis; “I claim the right of a native to pay my respects first to the
      foreigner who visits our capital, and,” he added in a lower tone, “who speaks so nobly of
      those who revere its exiles.”
The Englishman saluted, and walked slowly towards the door; but on reaching the threshold
      turned back and made a sign to Lemercier, unperceived by Alain.
Frederic understood the sign, and followed Graham Vane into the adjoining room, closing the
      door as he passed.
“My dear Lemercier, of course I should not have intruded on you at this hour on a mere visit
      of ceremony. I called to say that the Mademoiselle Duval whose address you sent me is not the
      right one,—not the lady whom, knowing your wide range of acquaintance, I asked you to aid me
      in finding out.”
“Not the right Duval? Diable! she answered your description, exactly.”
“Not at all.”
“You said she was very pretty and young,—under twenty.”
“You forgot that I said she deserved that description twenty-one years ago.”
“Ah, so you did; but some ladies are always young. ‘Age,’ says a wit in the ‘Figaro,’ ‘tis a
      river which the women compel to reascend to its source when it has flowed onward more than
      twenty years.’ Never mind: ‘soyez tranquille;’ I will find your Duval yet if she is to be
      found. But why could not the friend who commissioned you to inquire choose a name less common?
      Duval! every street in Paris has a shop-door over which is inscribed the name of Duval.”
“Quite true, there is the difficulty; however, my dear Lemercier, pray continue to look out
      for a Louise Duval who was young and pretty twenty-one years ago: this search ought to
      interest me more than that which I entrusted to you tonight, respecting the pearly-robed lady;
      for in the last I but gratify my own whim, in the first I discharge a promise to a friend.
      You, so perfect a Frenchman, know the difference; honour is engaged to the first. Be sure you
      let me know if you find any other Madame or Mademoiselle Duval; and of course you remember
      your promise not to mention to any one the commission of inquiry you so kindly undertake. I
      congratulate you on your friendship for M. de Rochebriant. What a noble countenance and
      manner!”
Lemercier returned to the Marquis. “Such a pity you can’t dine with us to-morrow. I fear you
      made but a poor dinner to-day. But it is always better to arrange the menu beforehand. I will
      send to Philippe’s tomorrow. Do not be afraid.”
The Marquis paused a moment, and on his young face a proud struggle was visible. At last he
      said, bluntly and manfully,
“My dear Frederic, your world and mine are not and cannot be the same. Why should I be
      ashamed to own to my old schoolfellow that I am poor,—very poor; that the dinner I have shared
      with you to-day is to me a criminal extravagance? I lodge in a single chamber on the
      fourth-story; I dine off a single plat at a small restaurateur’s; the utmost income I can
      allow to myself does not exceed five thousand francs a year: my fortunes I cannot hope much to
      improve. In his own country Alain de Rochebriant has no career.” Lemercier was so astonished
      by this confession that he remained for some moments silent, eyes and mouth both wide open; at
      length he sprang up, embraced his friend well-nigh sobbing, and exclaimed, “‘Tant mieux pour
      moi!’ You must take your lodging with me. I have a charming bedroom to spare. Don’t say no. It
      will raise my own position to say ‘I and Rochebriant keep house together.’ It must be so. Come
      here to-morrow. As for not having a career,—bah! I and Duplessis will settle that. You shall
      be a millionaire in two years. Meanwhile we will join capitals: I my paltry notes, you your
      grand name. Settled!”
“My dear, dear Frederic,” said the young noble, deeply affected, “on reflection you will see
      what you propose is impossible. Poor I may be without dishonour; live at another man’s cost I
      cannot do without baseness. It does not require to be ‘gentilhomme’ to feel that: it is enough
      to be a Frenchman. Come and see me when you can spare the time. There is my address. You are
      the only man in Paris to whom I shall be at home. Au revoir.” And breaking away from
      Lemercier’s clasp, the Marquis hurried off.
