<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER V.</head>
<p>The next morning the party broke up. Letters had been delivered both to Savarin and to
      Graham, which, even had the day for departure not been fixed, would have summoned them away.
      On reading his letter, Savarin’s brow became clouded. He made a sign to his wife after
      breakfast, and wandered away with her down an alley in the little garden. His trouble was of
      that nature which a wife either soothes or aggravates, according sometimes to her habitual
      frame of mind, sometimes to the mood of temper in which she may chance to be,—a household
      trouble, a pecuniary trouble.</p>
<p>Savarin was by no means an extravagant man. His mode of living, though elegant and
      hospitable, was modest compared to that of many French authors inferior to himself in the fame
      which at Paris brings a very good return in francs; but his station itself as the head of a
      powerful literary clique necessitated many expenses which were too congenial to his extreme
      good-nature to be regulated by strict prudence. His hand was always open to distressed writers
      and struggling artists, and his sole income was derived from his pen and a journal in which he
      was chief editor and formerly sole proprietor. But that journal had of late not prospered. He
      had sold or pledged a considerable share in the proprietorship. He had been compelled also to
      borrow a sum large for him, and the debt obtained from a retired bourgeois who lent out his
      moneys “by way,” he said, “of maintaining an excitement and interest in life,” would in a few
      days become due. The letter was not from that creditor; but it was from his publisher,
      containing a very disagreeable statement of accounts, pressing for settlement, and declining
      an offer of Savarin for a new book (not yet begun) except upon terms that the author valued
      himself too highly to accept. Altogether, the situation was unpleasant. There were many times
      in which Madame Savarin presumed to scold her distinguished husband for his want of prudence
      and thrift. But those were never the times when scolding could be of no use. It could clearly
      be of no use now. Now was the moment to cheer and encourage him; to reassure him as to his own
      undiminished powers and popularity, for he talked dejectedly of himself as obsolete and
      passing out of fashion; to convince him also of the impossibility that the ungrateful
      publisher whom Savarin’s more brilliant successes had enriched could encounter the odium of
      hostile proceedings; and to remind him of all the authors, all the artists, whom he in their
      earlier difficulties had so liberally assisted, and from whom a sum sufficing to pay the
      bourgeois creditor when the day arrived could now be honourably asked and would be readily
      contributed. In this last suggestion the homely prudent good-sense of Madame Savarin failed
      her. She did not comprehend that delicate pride of honour which, with all his Parisian
      frivolities and cynicism, dignified the Parisian man of genius. Savarin could not, to save his
      neck from a rope, have sent round the begging-hat to friends whom he had obliged. Madame
      Savarin was one of those women with large-lobed ears, who can be wonderfully affectionate,
      wonderfully sensible, admirable wives and mothers, and yet are deficient in artistic
      sympathies with artistic natures. Still, a really good honest wife is such an incalculable
      blessing to her lord, that, at the end of the talk in the solitary alley, this man of
      exquisite finesse, of the undefinably high-bred temperament, and, alas! the painful morbid
      susceptibility, which belongs to the genuine artistic character, emerged into the open sunlit
      lawn with his crest uplifted, his lip curved upward in its joyous mockery, and perfectly
      persuaded that somehow or other he should put down the offensive publisher, and pay off the
      unoffending creditor when the day for payment came. Still he had judgment enough to know that
      to do this he must get back to Paris, and could not dawdle away precious hours in discussing
      the principles of poetry with Graham Vane.</p>
<p>There was only one thing, apart from “the begging-hat,” in which Savarin dissented from his
      wife.—She suggested his starting a new journal in conjunction with Gustave Rameau, upon whose
      genius and the expectations to be formed from it (here she was tacitly thinking of Isaura
      wedded to Rameau, and more than a Malibran on the stage) she insisted vehemently. Savarin did
      not thus estimate Gustave Rameau, thought him a clever, promising young writer in a very bad
      school of writing, who might do well some day or other. But that a Rameau could help a Savarin
      to make a fortune! No; at that idea he opened his eyes, patted his wife’s shoulder, and called
      her “enfant.”</p>
<p>Graham’s letter was from M. Renard, and ran thus:—</p>
<quote>
<l> MONSIEUR,—I had the honour to call at your apartment this morning, and I write this line
      to the address given to me by your concierge to say that I have been fortunate enough to
      ascertain that the relation of the missing lady is now at Paris. I shall hold myself in
      readiness to attend your summons. Deign to accept, Monsieur, the assurance of my profound
      consideration. J. RENARD. </l></quote>
<p>This communication sufficed to put Graham into very high spirits. Anything that promised
      success to his research seemed to deliver his thoughts from a burden and his will from a
      fetter. Perhaps in a few days he might frankly and honourably say to Isaura words which would
      justify his retaining longer, and pressing more ardently, the delicate hand which trembled in
      his as they took leave.</p>
<p>On arriving at Paris, Graham despatched a note to M. Renard requesting to see him, and
      received a brief line in reply that M. Renard feared he should be detained on other and
      important business till the evening, but hoped to call at eight o’clock. A few minutes before
      that hour he entered Graham’s apartment.</p>
<p>“You have discovered the uncle of Louise Duval!” exclaimed Graham; “of course you mean M. de
      Mauleon, and he is at Paris?”</p>
<p>“True so far, Monsieur; but do not be too sanguine as to the results of the information I
      can give you. Permit me, as briefly as possible, to state the circumstances. When you
      acquainted me with the fact that M. de Mauleon was the uncle of Louise Duval, I told you that
      I was not without hopes of finding him out, though so long absent from Paris. I will now
      explain why. Some months ago, one of my colleagues engaged in the political department (which
      I am not) was sent to Lyons, in consequence of some suspicions conceived by the loyal
      authorities there of a plot against the emperor’s life. The suspicions were groundless, the
      plot a mare’s nest. But my colleague’s attention was especially drawn towards a man not mixed
      up with the circumstances from which a plot had been inferred, but deemed in some way or other
      a dangerous enemy to the Government. Ostensibly, he exercised a modest and small calling as a
      sort of courtier or agent de change; but it was noticed that certain persons familiarly
      frequenting his apartment, or to whose houses he used to go at night, were disaffected to the
      Government,—not by any means of the lowest rank,—some of them rich malcontents who had been
      devoted Orleanists; others, disappointed aspirants to office or the ‘cross;’ one or two
      well-born and opulent fanatics dreaming of another Republic. Certain very able articles in the
      journals of the excitable Midi, though bearing another signature, were composed or dictated by
      this man,—articles evading the censure and penalties of the law, but very mischievous in their
      tone. All who had come into familiar communication with this person were impressed with a
      sense of his powers; and also with a vague belief that he belonged to a higher class in
      breeding and education than that of a petty agent de change. My colleague set himself to watch
      the man, and took occasions of business at his little office to enter into talk with him. Not
      by personal appearance, but by voice, he came to a conclusion that the man was not wholly a
      stranger to him,—a peculiar voice with a slight Norman breadth of pronunciation, though a
      Parisian accent; a voice very low, yet very distinct; very masculine, yet very gentle. My
      colleague was puzzled till late one evening he observed the man coming out of the house of one
      of these rich malcontents, the rich malcontent himself accompanying him. My colleague,
      availing himself of the dimness of light, as the two passed into a lane which led to the
      agent’s apartment, contrived to keep close behind and listen to their conversation; but of
      this he heard nothing,—only, when at the end of the lane, the rich man turned abruptly, shook
      his companion warmly by the hand, and parted from him, saying, ‘Never fear; all shall go right
      with you, my dear Victor.’ At the sound of that name ‘Victor,’ my colleague’s memories, before
      so confused, became instantaneously clear. Previous to entering our service, he had been in
      the horse business, a votary of the turf; as such he had often seen the brilliant ‘sportman,’
      Victor de Mauleon; sometimes talked to him. Yes, that was the voice,—the slight Norman
      intonation (Victor de Mauleon’s father had it strongly, and Victor had passed some of his
      early childhood in Normandy), the subdued modulation of speech which had made so polite the
      offence to men, or so winning the courtship to women,—that was Victor de Mauleon. But why
      there in that disguise? What was his real business and object? My confrere had no time allowed
      to him to prosecute such inquiries. Whether Victor or the rich malcontent had observed him at
      their heels, and feared he might have overheard their words, I know not; but the next day
      appeared in one of the popular journals circulating among the ouvriers a paragraph stating
      that a Paris spy had been seen at Lyons, warning all honest men against his machinations, and
      containing a tolerably accurate description of his person. And that very day, on venturing
      forth, my estimable colleague suddenly found himself hustled by a ferocious throng, from whose
      hands he was with great difficulty rescued by the municipal guard. He left Lyons that night;
      and for recompense of his services received a sharp reprimand from his chief. He had committed
      the worst offence in our profession, trop de zele. Having only heard the outlines of this
      story from another, I repaired to my confrere after my last interview with Monsieur, and
      learned what I now tell you from his own lips. As he was not in my branch of the service, I
      could not order him to return to Lyons; and I doubt whether his chief would have allowed it.
      But I went to Lyons myself, and there ascertained that our supposed Vicomte had left that town
      for Paris some months ago, not long after the adventure of my colleague. The man bore a very
      good character generally,—was said to be very honest and inoffensive; and the notice taken of
      him by persons of higher rank was attributed generally to a respect for his talents, and not
      on account of any sympathy in political opinions. I found that the confrere mentioned, and who
      alone could identify M. de Mauleon in the disguise which the Vicomte had assumed, was absent
      on one of those missions abroad in which he is chiefly employed. I had to wait for his return,
      and it was only the day before yesterday that I obtained the following particulars. M. de
      Mauleon bears the same name as he did at Lyons,—that name is Jean Lebeau; he exercises the
      ostensible profession of a ‘letter-writer,’ and a sort of adviser on business among the
      workmen and petty bourgeoisie, and he nightly frequents the cafe Jean Jacques, Rue Faubourg
      Montmartre. It is not yet quite half-past eight, and, no doubt, you could see him at the cafe
      this very night, if you thought proper to go.”</p>
<p>“Excellent! I will go! Describe him!”</p>
<p>“Alas! that is exactly what I cannot do at present; for after hearing what I now tell you, I
      put the same request you do to my colleague, when, before he could answer me, he was summoned
      to the bureau of his chief, promising to return and give me the requisite description. He did
      not return; and I find that he was compelled, on quitting his chief, to seize the first train
      starting for Lille upon an important political investigation which brooked no delay. He will
      be back in a few days, and then Monsieur shall have the description.”</p>
<p>“Nay; I think I will seize time by the forelock, and try my chance tonight. If the man be
      really a conspirator, and it looks likely enough, who knows but what he may see quick reason
      to take alarm and vanish from Paris at any hour?—Cafe Jean Jacques, Rue ———; I will go. Stay;
      you have seen Victor de Mauleon in his youth: what was he like then?”</p>
<p>“Tall, slender, but broad-shouldered, very erect, carrying his head high, a profusion of
      dark curls, a small black mustache, fair clear complexion, light-coloured eyes with dark
      lashes, fort bel homme. But he will not look like that now.”</p>
<p>“His present age?”</p>
<p>“Forty-seven or forty-eight. But before you go, I must beg you to consider well what you are
      about. It is evident that M. de Mauleon has some strong reason, whatever it be, for merging
      his identity in that of Jean Lebeau. I presume, therefore, that you could scarcely go up to M.
      Lebeau, when you have discovered him, and say, ‘Pray, Monsieur le Vicomte, can you give me
      some tidings of your niece, Louise Duval?’ If you thus accosted him, you might possibly bring
      some danger on yourself, but you would certainly gain no information from him.”</p>
<p>“True.”</p>
<p>“On the other hand, if you make his acquaintance as M. Lebeau, how can you assume him to
      know anything about Louise Duval?”</p>
<p>“Parbleu! Monsieur Renard, you try to toss me aside on both horns of the dilemma; but it
      seems to me that, if I once make his acquaintance as M. Lebeau, I might gradually and
      cautiously feel my way as to the best mode of putting the question to which I seek reply. I
      suppose, too, that the man must be in very poor circumstances to adopt so humble a calling,
      and that a small sum of money may smooth all difficulties.”</p>
<p>“I am not so sure of that,” said M. Renard, thoughtfully; “but grant that money may do so,
      and grant also that the Vicomte, being a needy man, has become a very unscrupulous one,—is
      there anything in your motives for discovering Louise Duval which might occasion you trouble
      and annoyance, if it were divined by a needy and unscrupulous man; anything which might give
      him a power of threat or exaction? Mind, I am not asking you to tell me any secret you have
      reasons for concealing, but I suggest that it might be prudent if you did not let M. Lebeau
      know your real name and rank; if, in short, you could follow his example, and adopt a
      disguise. But no; when I think of it, you would doubtless be so unpractised in the art of
      disguise that he would detect you at once to be other than you seem; and if suspecting you of
      spying into his secrets, and if those secrets be really of a political nature, your very life
      might not be safe.”</p>
<p>“Thank you for your hint; the disguise is an excellent idea, and combines amusement with
      precaution. That this Victor de Mauleon must be a very unprincipled and dangerous man is, I
      think, abundantly clear. Granting that he was innocent of all design of robbery in the affair
      of the jewels, still, the offence which he did own—that of admitting himself at night by a
      false key into the rooms of a wife, whom he sought to surprise or terrify into dishonour—was a
      villanous action; and his present course of life is sufficiently mysterious to warrant the
      most unfavourable supposition. Besides, there is another motive for concealing my name from
      him: you say that he once had a duel with a Vane, who was very probably my father, and I have
      no wish to expose myself to the chance of his turning up in London some day, and seeking to
      renew there the acquaintance that I had courted at Paris. As for my skill in playing any part
      I may assume, do not fear; I am no novice in that. In my younger days I was thought clever in
      private theatricals, especially in the transformations of appearance which belong to light
      comedy and farce. Wait a few minutes, and you shall see.”</p>
<p>Graham then retreated into his bedroom, and in a few minutes reappeared so changed, that
      Renard at first glance took him for a stranger. He had doffed his dress—which habitually, when
      in Capitals, was characterized by the quiet, indefinable elegance that to a man of the great
      world, high-bred and young, seems “to the manner born”—for one of those coarse suits which
      Englishmen are wont to wear in their travels, and by which they are represented in French or
      German caricatures,—loose jacket of tweed with redundant pockets, waistcoat to match, short
      dust-coloured trousers. He had combed his hair straight over his forehead, which, as I have
      said somewhere before, appeared in itself to alter the character of his countenance, and,
      without any resort to paints or cosmetics, had somehow or other given to the expression of his
      face an impudent, low-bred expression, with a glass screwed on to his right eye,—such a look
      as a cockney journeyman, wishing to pass for a “swell” about town, may cast on a servant-maid
      in the pit of a suburban theatre.</p>
<p>“Will it do, old fellow?” he exclaimed, in a rollicking, swaggering tone of voice, speaking
      French with a villanous British accent.</p>
<p>“Perfectly,” said Renard, laughing. “I offer my compliments, and if ever you are ruined,
      Monsieur, I will promise you a place in our police. Only one caution,—take care not to overdo
      your part.”</p>
<p>“Right. A quarter to nine; I’m off.”</p>
</div>