
CHAPTER VI.
The next night Graham in vain looked round for Alain in M. Louvier’s salons, and missed his
      high-bred mien and melancholy countenance. M. Louvier had been for some four years a childless
      widower, but his receptions were not the less numerously attended, nor his establishment less
      magnificently monde for the absence of a presiding lady: very much the contrary; it was
      noticeable how much he had increased his status and prestige as a social personage since the
      death of his unlamented spouse.
To say truth, she had been rather a heavy drag on his triumphal car. She had been the
      heiress of a man who had amassed a great deal of money,—not in the higher walks of commerce,
      but in a retail trade.
Louvier himself was the son of a rich money-lender; he had entered life with an ample
      fortune and an intense desire to be admitted into those more brilliant circles in which
      fortune can be dissipated with eclat. He might not have attained this object but for the
      friendly countenance of a young noble who was then—

 “The glass of fashion and the mould of form;” 
but this young noble, of whom later we shall hear more, came suddenly to grief, and when the
      money-lender’s son lost that potent protector, the dandies, previously so civil, showed him a
      very cold shoulder.
Louvier then became an ardent democrat, and recruited the fortune he had impaired by the
      aforesaid marriage, launched into colossal speculations, and became enormously rich. His
      aspirations for social rank now revived, but his wife sadly interfered with them. She was
      thrifty by nature; sympathized little with her husband’s genius for accumulation; always said
      he would end in a hospital; hated Republicans; despised authors and artists, and by the ladies
      of the beau monde was pronounced common and vulgar.
So long as she lived, it was impossible for Louvier to realize his ambition of having one of
      the salons which at Paris establish celebrity and position. He could not then command those
      advantages of wealth which he especially coveted. He was eminently successful in doing this
      now. As soon as she was safe in Pere la Chaise, he enlarged his hotel by the purchase and
      annexation of an adjoining house; redecorated and refurnished it, and in this task displayed,
      it must be said to his credit, or to that of the administrators he selected for the purpose, a
      nobleness of taste rarely exhibited nowadays. His collection of pictures was not large, and
      consisted exclusively of the French school, ancient and modern, for in all things Louvier
      affected the patriot. But each of those pictures was a gem; such Watteaus, such Greuzes, such
      landscapes by Patel, and, above all, such masterpieces by Ingres, Horace Vernet, and Delaroche
      were worth all the doubtful originals of Flemish and Italian art which make the ordinary boast
      of private collectors.
These pictures occupied two rooms of moderate size, built for their reception, and lighted
      from above. The great salon to which they led contained treasures scarcely less precious; the
      walls were covered with the richest silks which the looms of Lyons could produce. Every piece
      of furniture here was a work of art in its way: console-tables of Florentine mosaic, inlaid
      with pearl and lapis-lazuli; cabinets in which the exquisite designs of the Renaissance were
      carved in ebony; colossal vases of Russian malachite, but wrought by French artists. The very
      knick-knacks scattered carelessly about the room might have been admired in the cabinets of
      the Palazzo Pitti. Beyond this room lay the salle de danse, its ceiling painted by ———,
      supported by white marble columns, the glazed balcony and the angles of the room filled with
      tiers of exotics. In the dining-room, on the same floor, on the other side of the
      landing-place, were stored in glazed buffets not only vessels and salvers of plate, silver and
      gold, but, more costly still, matchless specimens of Sevres and Limoges, and mediaeval
      varieties of Venetian glass. On the ground-floor, which opened on the lawn of a large garden,
      Louvier had his suite of private apartments, furnished, as he said, “simply, according to
      English notions of comfort;”—Englishmen would have said, “according to French notions of
      luxury.” Enough of these details, which a writer cannot give without feeling himself somewhat
      vulgarized in doing so, but without a loose general idea of which a reader would not have an
      accurate conception of something not vulgar,—of something grave, historical, possibly
      tragical,—the existence of a Parisian millionaire at the date of this narrative.
The evidence of wealth was everywhere manifest at M. Louvier’s, but it was everywhere
      refined by an equal evidence of taste. The apartments devoted to hospitality ministered to the
      delighted study of artists, to whom free access was given, and of whom two or three might be
      seen daily in the “show-rooms,” copying pictures or taking sketches of rare articles of
      furniture or effects for palatian interiors.
Among the things which rich English visitors of Paris most coveted to see was M. Louvier’s
      hotel, and few among the richest left it without a sigh of envy and despair. Only in such
      London houses as belong to a Sutherland or a Holford could our metropolis exhibit a splendour
      as opulent and a taste as refined.
M. Louvier had his set evenings for popular assemblies. At these were entertained the
      Liberals of every shade, from tricolor to rouge, with the artists and writers most in vogue,
      pele-mele with decorated diplomatists, ex-ministers, Orleanists, and Republicans,
      distinguished foreigners, plutocrats of the Bourse, and lions male and female from the arid
      nurse of that race, the Chaussee d’Antin. Of his more select reunions something will be said
      later.
“And how does this poor Paris metamorphosed please Monsieur Vane?” asked a Frenchman with a
      handsome, intelligent countenance, very carefully dressed though in a somewhat bygone fashion,
      and carrying off his tenth lustrum with an air too sprightly to evince any sense of the
      weight. This gentleman, the Vicomte de Breze, was of good birth, and had a legitimate right to
      his title of Vicomte,—which is more than can be said of many vicomtes one meets at Paris. He
      had no other property, however, than a principal share in an influential journal, to which he
      was a lively and sparkling contributor. In his youth, under the reign of Louis Philippe, he
      had been a chief among literary exquisites; and Balzac was said to have taken him more than
      once as his model for those brilliant young vauriens who figure in the great novelist’s comedy
      of Human Life. The Vicomte’s fashion expired with the Orleanist dynasty.
“Is it possible, my dear Vicomte,” answered Graham, “not to be pleased with a capital so
      marvellously embellished?”
“Embellished it may be to foreign eyes,” said the Vicomte, sighing, “but not improved to the
      taste of a Parisian like me. I miss the dear Paris of old,—the streets associated with my
      beaux jours are no more. Is there not something drearily monotonous in those interminable
      perspectives? How frightfully the way lengthens before one’s eyes! In the twists and curves of
      the old Paris one was relieved from the pain of seeing how far one had to go from one spot to
      another,—each tortuous street had a separate idiosyncrasy; what picturesque diversities, what
      interesting recollections,—all swept away! Mon Dieu! and what for,—miles of florid facades
      staring and glaring at one with goggle-eyed pitiless windows; house-rents trebled, and the
      consciousness that if you venture to grumble underground railways, like concealed volcanoes,
      can burst forth on you at any moment with an eruption of bayonets and muskets. This maudit
      empire seeks to keep its hold on France much as a grand seigneur seeks to enchain a nymph of
      the ballet,—tricks her out in finery and baubles, and insures her infidelity the moment he
      fails to satisfy her whims.”
“Vicomte,” answered Graham, “I have had the honour to know you since I was a small boy at a
      preparatory school home for the holidays, and you were a guest at my father’s country-house.
      You were then fete as one of the most promising writers among the young men of the day,
      especially favoured by the princes of the reigning family. I shall never forget the impression
      made on me by your brilliant appearance and your no less brilliant talk.”
“Ah! ces beaux jours! ce bon Louis Philippe, ce cher petit Joinville,” sighed the
      Vicomte.
“But at that day you compared le bon Louis Philippe to Robert Macaire. You described all his
      sons, including, no doubt, ce cher petit Joinville, in terms of resentful contempt, as so many
      plausible gamins whom Robert Macaire was training to cheat the public in the interest of the
      family firm. I remember my father saying to you in answer, ‘No royal house in Europe has more
      sought to develop the literature of an epoch and to signalize its representatives by social
      respect and official honours than that of the Orleans dynasty. You, Monsieur de Breze, do but
      imitate your elders in seeking to destroy the dynasty under which you flourish; should you
      succeed, you hommes de plume will be the first sufferers and the loudest complainers.’”
“Cher Monsieur Vane,” said the Vicomte, smiling complacently, “your father did me great
      honour in classing me with Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas, Emile de Girardin, and the other
      stars of the Orleanist galaxy, including our friend here, M. Savarin. A very superior man was
      your father.”
“And,” said Savarin, who, being an Orleanist, had listened to Graham’s speech with an
      approving smile,—“and if I remember right, my dear De Breze, no one was more brilliantly
      severe than yourself on poor De Lamartine and the Republic that succeeded Louis Philippe; no
      one more emphatically expressed the yearning desire for another Napoleon to restore order at
      home and renown abroad. Now you have got another Napoleon.”
“And I want change for my Napoleon,” said De Breze, laughing.
“My dear Vicomte,” said Graham, “one thing we may all grant,—that in culture and intellect
      you are far superior to the mass of your fellow Parisians; that you are therefore a favourable
      type of their political character.”
“Ah, mon cher, vous etes trop aimable.”
“And therefore I venture to say this,—if the archangel Gabriel were permitted to descend to
      Paris and form the best government for France that the wisdom of seraph could devise, it would
      not be two years—I doubt if it would be six months—before out of this Paris, which you call
      the Foyer des Idees, would emerge a powerful party, adorned by yourself and other hommes de
      plume, in favour of a revolution for the benefit of ce bon Satan and ce cher petit
      Beelzebub.”
“What a pretty vein of satire you have, mon cher!” said the Vicomte, good-humouredly; “there
      is a sting of truth in your witticism. Indeed, I must send you some articles of mine in which
      I have said much the same thing,—les beaux, esprits se rencontrent. The fault of us French is
      impatience, desire of change; but then it is that desire which keeps the world going and
      retains our place at the head of it. However, at this time we are all living too fast for our
      money to keep up with it, and too slow for our intellect not to flag. We vie with each other
      on the road to ruin, for in literature all the old paths to fame are shut up.”
Here a tall gentleman, with whom the Vicomte had been conversing before he accosted Vane,
      and who had remained beside De Breze listening in silent attention to this colloquy,
      interposed, speaking in the slow voice of one accustomed to measure his words, and with a
      slight but unmistakable German accent. “There is that, Monsieur de Breze, which makes one
      think gravely of what you say so lightly. Viewing things with the unprejudiced eyes of a
      foreigner, I recognize much for which France should be grateful to the Emperor. Under his sway
      her material resources have been marvellously augmented; her commerce has been placed by the
      treaty with England on sounder foundations, and is daily exhibiting richer life; her
      agriculture had made a prodigious advance wherever it has allowed room for capitalists, and
      escaped from the curse of petty allotments and peasant-proprietors, a curse which would have
      ruined any country less blessed by Nature; turbulent factions have been quelled; internal
      order maintained; the external prestige of France, up at least to the date of the Mexican war,
      increased to an extent that might satisfy even a Frenchman’s amour propre; and her advance in
      civilization has been manifested by the rapid creation of a naval power which should put even
      England on her mettle. But, on the other hand—”
“Ay, on the other hand,” said the Vicomte.
“On the other hand there are in the imperial system two causes of decay and of rot silently
      at work. They may not be the faults of the Emperor, but they are such misfortunes as may cause
      the fall of the Empire. The first is an absolute divorce between the political system and the
      intellectual culture of the nation. The throne and the system rest on universal suffrage,—on a
      suffrage which gives to classes the most ignorant a power that preponderates over all the
      healthful elements of knowledge. It is the tendency of all ignorant multitudes to personify
      themselves, as it were, in one individual. They cannot comprehend you when you argue for a
      principle; they do comprehend you when you talk of a name. The Emperor Napoleon is to them a
      name, and the prefects and officials who influence their votes are paid for incorporating all
      principles in the shibboleth of that single name. You have thus sought the well-spring of a
      political system in the deepest stratum of popular ignorance. To rid popular ignorance of its
      normal revolutionary bias, the rural peasants are indoctrinated with the conservatism that
      comes from the fear which appertains to property. They have their roots of land or their
      shares in a national loan. Thus you estrange the crassitude of an ignorant democracy still
      more from the intelligence of the educated classes by combining it with the most selfish and
      abject of all the apprehensions that are ascribed to aristocracy and wealth. What is thus
      embedded in the depths of your society makes itself shown on the surface. Napoleon III. has
      been compared to Augustus; and there are many startling similitudes between them in character
      and in fate. Each succeeds to the heritage of a great name that had contrived to unite
      autocracy with the popular cause; each subdued all rival competitors, and inaugurated despotic
      rule in the name of freedom; each mingled enough of sternness with ambitious will to stain
      with bloodshed the commencement of his power,—but it would be an absurd injustice to fix the
      same degree of condemnation on the coup d’etat as humanity fixes on the earlier cruelties of
      Augustus; each, once firm in his seat, became mild and clement,—Augustus perhaps from policy,
      Napoleon III. from a native kindliness of disposition which no fair critic of character can
      fail to acknowledge. Enough of similitudes; now for one salient difference. Observe how
      earnestly Augustus strove, and how completely he succeeded in the task, to rally round him all
      the leading intellects in every grade and of every party,—the followers of Antony, the friends
      of Brutus; every great captain, every great statesman, every great writer, every mail who
      could lend a ray of mind to his own Julian constellation, and make the age of Augustus an era
      in the annals of human intellect and genius. But this has not been the good fortune of your
      Emperor. The result of his system has been the suppression of intellect in every department.
      He has rallied round him not one great statesman; his praises are hymned by not one great
      poet. The celebrates of a former day stand aloof; or, preferring exile to constrained
      allegiance, assail him with unremitting missiles from their asylum in foreign shores. His
      reign is sterile of new celebrites. The few that arise enlist themselves against him. Whenever
      he shall venture to give full freedom to the press and to the legislature, the intellect thus
      suppressed or thus hostile will burst forth in collected volume. His partisans have not been
      trained and disciplined to meet such assailants. They will be as weak as no doubt they will be
      violent. And the worst is, that the intellect thus rising in mass against him will be warped
      and distorted, like captives who, being kept in chains, exercise their limbs on escaping in
      vehement jumps without definite object. The directors of emancipated opinion may thus be
      terrible enemies to the Imperial Government, but they will be very unsafe councillors to
      France. Concurrently with this divorce between the Imperial system and the national
      intellect,—a divorce so complete that even your salons have lost their wit, and even your
      caricatures their point,—a corruption of manners which the Empire, I own, did not originate,
      but inherit, has become so common that every one owns and nobody blames it. The gorgeous
      ostentation of the Court has perverted the habits of the people. The intelligence abstracted
      from other vents betakes itself to speculating for a fortune; and the greed of gain and the
      passion for show are sapping the noblest elements of the old French manhood. Public opinion
      stamps with no opprobrium a minister or favourite who profits by a job; and I fear you will
      find that jobbing pervades all your administrative departments.”
“All very true,” said De Breze, with a shrug of the shoulders and in a tone of levity that
      seemed to ridicule the assertion he volunteered; “Virtue and Honour banished from courts and
      salons and the cabinet of authors ascend to fairer heights in the attics of ouvriers.”
“The ouvriers, ouvriers of Paris!” cried this terrible German.
“Ay, Monsieur le Comte, what can you say against our ouvriers? A German count cannot
      condescend to learn anything about ces petites gens.”
“Monsieur,” replied the German, “in the eyes of a statesman there are no petites gens, and
      in those of a philosopher no petites choses. We in Germany have too many difficult problems
      affecting our working classes to solve, not to have induced me to glean all the information I
      can as to the ouvriers of Paris. They have among them men of aspirations as noble as can
      animate the souls of philosophers and poets, perhaps not the less noble because common-sense
      and experience cannot follow their flight; but as a body the ouvriers of Paris have not been
      elevated in political morality by the benevolent aim of the Emperor to find them ample work
      and good wages independent of the natural laws that regulate the markets of labour. Accustomed
      thus to consider the State bound to maintain them, the moment the State fails in that
      impossible task, they will accommodate their honesty to a rush upon property under the name of
      social reform.
“Have you not noticed how largely increased within the last few years is the number of those
      who cry out, ‘La Propriete, cest le vol’? Have you considered the rapid growth of the
      International Association? I do not say that for all these evils—the Empire is exclusively
      responsible. To a certain degree they are found in all rich communities, especially where
      democracy is more or less in the ascendant. To a certain extent they exist in the large towns
      of Germany; they are conspicuously increasing in England; they are acknowledged to be
      dangerous in the United States of America; they are, I am told on good authority, making
      themselves visible with the spread of civilization in Russia. But under the French Empire they
      have become glaringly rampant, and I venture to predict that the day is not far off when the
      rot at work throughout all layers and strata of French society will insure a fall of the
      fabric at the sound of which the world will ring.
“There is many a fair and stately tree which continues to throw out its leaves and rear its
      crest till suddenly the wind smites it, and then, and not till then, the trunk which seems so
      solid is found to be but the rind to a mass of crumbled powder.”
“Monsieur le Comte,” said the Vicomte, “you are a severe critic and a lugubrious prophet;
      but a German is so safe from revolution that he takes alarm at the stir of movement which is
      the normal state of the French esprit.”
“French esprit may soon evaporate into Parisian betise. As to Germany being safe from
      revolution, allow me to repeat a saying of Goethe’s-but has Monsieur le Vicomte ever heard of
      Goethe?”
“Goethe, of course,—tres joli ecrivain.”
“Goethe said to some one who was making much the same remark as yourself, ‘We Germans are in
      a state of revolution now, but we do things so slowly that it will be a hundred years before
      we Germans shall find it out; but when completed, it will be the greatest revolution society
      has yet seen, and will last like the other revolutions that, beginning, scarce noticed, in
      Germany, have transformed the world.’”
“Diable, Monsieur le Comte! Germans transformed the world! What revolutions do you speak
      of?”
“The invention of gunpowder, the invention of printing, and the expansion of a monk’s
      quarrel with his Pope into the Lutheran revolution.”
Here the German paused, and asked the Vicomte to introduce him to Vane, which De Breze did
      by the title of Count von Rudesheim. On hearing Vane’s name, the Count inquired if he were
      related to the orator and statesman, George Graham Vane, whose opinions, uttered in
      Parliament, were still authoritative among German thinkers. This compliment to his deceased
      father immensely gratified but at the same time considerably surprised the Englishman. His
      father, no doubt, had been a man of much influence in the British House of Commons,—a very
      weighty speaker, and, while in office, a first-rate administrator; but Englishmen know what a
      House of Commons reputation is,—how fugitive, how little cosmopolitan; and that a German count
      should ever have heard of his father delighted but amazed him. In stating himself to be the
      son of George Graham Vane, he intimated not only the delight but the amaze, with the frank
      savoir vivre which was one of his salient characteristics.
“Sir,” replied the German, speaking in very correct English, but still with his national
      accent, “every German reared to political service studies England as the school for practical
      thought distinct from impracticable theories. Long may you allow us to do so! Only excuse me
      one remark,—never let the selfish element of the practical supersede the generous element.
      Your father never did so in his speeches, and therefore we admired him. At the present day we
      don’t so much care to study English speeches; they may be insular,—they are not European. I
      honour England; Heaven grant that you may not be making sad mistakes in the belief that you
      can long remain England if you cease to be European.” Herewith the German bowed, not
      uncivilly,—on the contrary, somewhat ceremoniously,—and disappeared with a Prussian Secretary
      of Embassy, whose arm he linked in his own, into a room less frequented.
“Vicomte, who and what is your German count?” asked Vane.
“A solemn pedant,” answered the lively Vicomte,—“a German count, que voulez-vous de
      plus?”
