
CHAPTER VII.
No satisfactory result attended the inquiries made at Munich save indeed this certainty,—the
      certificates attesting the decease of some person calling herself Louise Duval had not been
      forged. They were indubitably genuine. A lady bearing that name had arrived at one of the
      principal hotels late in the evening, and had there taken handsome rooms. She was attended by
      no servant, but accompanied by a gentleman, who, however, left the hotel as soon as he had
      seen her lodged to her satisfaction. The books of the hotel still retained the entry of her
      name,—Madame Duval, Francaise rentiere. On comparing the handwriting of this entry with the
      letter from Richard King’s first wife, Graham found it to differ; but then it was not certain,
      though probable, that the entry had been written by the alleged Madame Duval herself. She was
      visited the next day by the same gentleman who had accompanied her on arriving. He dined and
      spent the evening with her. But no one at the hotel could remember what was the gentleman’s
      name, nor even if he were announced by any name. He never called again. Two days afterwards,
      Madame Duval was taken ill; a doctor was sent for, and attended her till her death. This
      doctor was easily found. He remembered the case perfectly,—congestion of the lungs, apparently
      caused by cold caught on her journey. Fatal symptoms rapidly manifested themselves, and she
      died on the third day from the seizure. She was a young and handsome woman. He had asked her
      during her short illness if he should not write to her friends; if there were no one she would
      wish to be sent for. She replied that there was only one friend, to whom she had already
      written, and who would arrive in a day or two; and on inquiring, it appeared that she had
      written such a letter, and taken it herself to the post on the morning of the day she was
      taken ill.
She had in her purse not a large sum, but money enough to cover all her expenses, including
      those of her funeral, which, according to the law in force at the place, followed very quickly
      on her decease. The arrival of the friend to whom she had written being expected, her effects
      were, in the meanwhile, sealed up. The day after her death a letter arrived for her, which was
      opened. It was evidently written by a man, and apparently by a lover. It expressed an
      impassioned regret that the writer was unavoidably prevented returning to Munich so soon as he
      had hoped, but trusted to see his dear bouton de rose in the course of the following week; it
      was only signed Achille, and gave no address. Two or three days after, a lady, also young and
      handsome, arrived at the hotel, and inquired for Madame Duval. She was greatly shocked at
      hearing of her decease. When sufficiently recovered to bear being questioned as to Madame
      Duval’s relations and position, she appeared confused; said, after much pressing, that she was
      no relation to the deceased; that she believed Madame Duval had no relations with whom she was
      on friendly terms,—at least she had never heard her speak of any; and that her own
      acquaintance with the deceased, though cordial, was very recent. She could or would not give
      any clew to the writer of the letter signed Achille, and she herself quitted Munich that
      evening, leaving the impression that Madame Duval had been one of those ladies who, in
      adopting a course of life at variance with conventional regulations, are repudiated by their
      relations, and probably drop even their rightful names.
Achille never appeared; but a few days after, a lawyer at Munich received a letter from
      another at Vienna, requesting, in compliance with a client’s instructions, the formal
      certificates of Louise Duval’s death. These were sent as directed, and nothing more about the
      ill-fated woman was heard of. After the expiration of the time required by law, the seals were
      removed from the effects, which consisted of two malles and a dressing-case. But they only
      contained the articles appertaining to a lady’s wardrobe or toilet,—no letters, not even
      another note from Achille,—no clew, in short, to the family or antecedents of the deceased.
      What then had become of these effects, no one at the hotel could give a clear or satisfactory
      account. It was said by the mistress of the hotel, rather sullenly, that they had, she
      supposed, been sold by her predecessor, and by order of the authorities, for the benefit of
      the poor.
If the lady who had represented herself as Louise Duval’s acquaintance had given her own
      name, which doubtless she did, no one recollected it. It was not entered in the books of the
      hotel, for she had not lodged there; nor did it appear that she had allowed time for formal
      examination by the civil authorities. In fact, it was clear that poor Louise Duval had been
      considered as an adventuress by the hotel-keeper and the medical attendant at Munich; and her
      death had excited so little interest, that it was strange that even so many particulars
      respecting it could be gleaned.
After a prolonged but fruitless stay at Munich, Graham and M. Renard repaired to Vienna;
      there, at least, Madame Marigny had given an address, and there she might be heard of.
At Vienna, however, no research availed to discover a trace of any such person; and in
      despair Graham returned to England in the January of 1870, and left the further prosecution of
      his inquiries to M. Renard, who, though obliged to transfer himself to Paris for a time,
      promised that he would leave no stone unturned for the discovery of Madame Marigny; and Graham
      trusted to that assurance when M. Renard, rejecting half of the large gratuity offered him,
      added, “Je suis Francais; this with me has ceased to be an affair of money; it has become an
      affair that involves my amour propre.”
