
CHAPTER VI.
Elizabeth got tea ready with unwonted diligence and considerable excitement. Any visitor was
     a rare occurrence in this very quiet family; but a gentleman visitor—a young gentleman too—was
     a remarkable fact, arousing both interest and curiosity. For in the latter quality this girl of
     seventeen could scarcely be expected to be deficient; and as to the former, she had so
     completely identified herself with the family she served, that all their concerns were her
     concerns also. Her acute comments on their few guests, and on their little scholars, sometimes
     amused Hilary as much as her criticisms on the books she read. But as neither were ever put
     forward intrusively or impertinently, she let them pass, and only laughed over them with
     Johanna in private.
In speaking of these said books, and the questions they led to, it was not likely but that
     mistress and maid—one aged twenty-two, and the other seventeen—should occasionally light upon a
     subject rather interesting to women of their ages, though not commonly discussed between
     mistresses and maids. Nevertheless, when it did come in the way, Miss Hilary never shirked it,
     but talked it out, frankly and freely, as she would to any other person.
"The girl has feelings and notions on the matter, like all other girls, I suppose," reasoned
     she to herself; "so it is important that her notions should be kept clear, and her feelings
     right. It may do her some good, and save her from much harm."
And so it befell that Elizabeth Hand, whose blunt ways, unlovely person, and temperament so
     oddly nervous and reserved, kept her from attracting any "sweetheart" of her own class, had
     unconsciously imbibed her mistress's theory of love. Love, pure and simple, the very deepest
     and highest, sweetest and most solemn thing in life: to be believed in devoutly until it came,
     and when it did come, to be held to, firmly, faithfully, with a single-minded, settled
     constancy, till death. A creed, quite impossible, many will say, in this ordinary world, and
     most dangerous to be put into the head of a poor servant. Yet a woman is but a woman, be she
     maid-servant or queen; and if, from queens to maid-servants, girls were taught thus to think of
     love, there might be a few more "broken" hearts perhaps, but there would certainly be fewer
     wicked hearts; far fewer corrupted lives of men, and degraded lives of women; far fewer unholy
     marriages, and desolated, dreary, homeless homes.
Elizabeth, having cleared away her tea-things, stood listening to the voices in the parlor,
     and pondering. She had sometimes wondered in her own mind that no knight ever came to carry off
     her charming princess—her admired and beloved Miss Hilary. Miss Hilary, on her part, seemed
     totally indifferent to the youths at Stowbury; who indeed were, Elizabeth allowed, quite
     unworthy her regard. The only suitable lover for her young mistress must be somebody
     exceedingly grand and noble—a compound of the best heroes of Shakespeare, Scott, Fenimore
     Cooper, Maria Edgeworth, and Harriet Martineau. When this strange gentleman appeared—in
     ordinary coat and hat, or rather Glengary bonnet, neither particularly handsome nor
     particularly tall, yet whose coming had evidently given Miss Hilary so much pleasure, and who,
     once or twice while waiting at tea, Elizabeth fancied she had seen looking at Miss Hilary as
     nobody ever looked before—when Mr. Robert Lyon appeared on the horizon, the faithful "bower
     maiden" was a good deal disappointed.
She had expected something better; at all events, something different. Her first brilliant
     castle in the air fell, poor lass! but she quickly built it up again, and, with the vivid
     imagination of her age, she mapped out the whole future, ending by a vision of Miss Hilary, all
     in white, sweeping down the Terrace in a carriage and pair—to fortune and happiness; leaving
     herself, though with a sore want at her heart, and a great longing to follow, to devote the
     remainder of her natural life to Miss Johanna.
"Her couldna do without somebody to see to her—and Miss Selina do worrit her so." muttered
     Elizabeth, in the excitement of this Almaschar vision, relapsing into her old provincialisms.
     "So, even if Miss Hilary axes me to come, I'll stop, I reckon. Ay, I'll stop wi' Miss Leaf." 
This valorous determination taken, the poor maid servant's dream was broken by the opening of
     the parlor door, and an outcry of Ascott's for his coat and gloves, he having to fetch his
     aunts home at nine o'clock, Mr. Lyon accompanying him. And as they all stood together at the
     front door, Elizabeth overheard Mr. Lyon say something about what a beautiful night it was.
"It would do you no harm, Miss Hilary; will you walk with us?"
"If you like."
Hilary went up stairs for her bonnet and shawl; but when, a minute or two after, Elizabeth
     followed her with a candle, she found her standing in the centre of the room, all in the dark,
     her face white and her hands trembling.
"Thank you, thank you!" she said mechanically, as Elizabeth folded and fastened her shawl for
     her—and descended immediately. Elizabeth watched her take, not Ascott's arm, but Mr. Lyon's,
     and walk down the terrace in the starlight.
"Some'at's wrong. I'd like to know who's been a-vexin' of her," thought fiercely the young
     servant.
No, nobody had been "a-vexing" her mistress. There was nobody to blame; only there had
     happened to Hilary one of those things which strike like a sword through a young and happy
     heart, taking all the life and youth out of it.
Robert Lyon had, half an hour ago, told her—and she had had to hear it as a piece of simple
     news, to which she had only to say, "Indeed!"—that to day and to-morrow were his two last days
     at Stowbury—almost his last in England. Within a week he was to sail for India.
There had befallen him what most people would have considered a piece of rare good fortune.
     At the London University, a fellow student, whom he had been gratuitously "coaching" in
     Hindostanee, fell ill, and was "thrown upon his hands." as he briefly defined services which
     must have been great, since they had resulted in this end. The young man's father—a Liverpool
     and Bombay merchant—made him an offer to go out there, to their house, at a rising salary of
     300 rupees a month for three years; after the third year to become a junior partner; remaining
     at Bombay in that capacity for two years more.
This he told to Hilary and Ascott in almost as few words as I have here put it—for brevity
     seemed a refuge to him. It was also to one of them. But Ascott asked so many questions that his
     aunt needed to ask none. She only listened, and tried to take all in, and understand it, that
     is, in a consecutive, intelligent, business shape, without feeling it. She dared not let
     herself feel it, not for a second, till they were out, arm-in-arm, under the quiet winter
     stars. Then she heard his voice asking her, "So you think I was right?"
"Right?" she echoed mechanically.
"I mean in accepting that sudden chance, and changing my whole plan of life. I did not do
     it—believe me—without a motive."
"What motive?" she would once unhesitatingly have asked; now she could not.
Robert Lyon continued speaking, distinctly and yet in an undertone, that though Ascott was
     walking a few yards off, Hilary felt was meant for her alone to hear.
"The change is, you perceive, from the life of a student to that of a man of business. I do
     not deny that I preferred the first. Once upon a time to be a fellow in a college, or a
     professor, or the like, was my utmost aim and I would have half killed myself to attain it.
     Now, I think differently."
He paused, but did not seem to require an answer, and it did not come.
"I want, not to be rich but to get a decent competence, and to get it as soon as I can. I
     want not to ruin my health with incessant study. I have already injured it a good deal."
"Have you been ill? You never said so."
"Oh no, it was hardly worth while. And I knew an active life would soon set me right again.
     No fear! there's life in the old dog yet. He does not wish to die. But," Mr. Lyon pursued, "I
     have had a 'sair fecht' the last year or two. I would not go through it again, nor see any one
     dear to me go through it. It is over, but it has left its scars. Strange! I have been poor all
     my life, yet I never till now felt an actual terror of poverty."
Hilary shrank within herself; less even at the words than at something in their
     tone—something hard, nay fierce; something at once despairing and aggressive.
"It is strange," she said; "such a terror is not like you. I feel none; I can not even
     understand it."
"No, I knew you could not," he muttered; and was silent.
So was Hilary. A vague trouble came over her. Could it be that he, Robert Lyon, had been
     seized with the auri sacra fames, which he had so often inveighed
     against and despised? that his long battle with poverty had caused in him such an overweening
     desire for riches that, to obtain them, he would sacrifice every thing else, exile himself to a
     far country for years, selling his very life and soul for gold?
Such a thought of him was so terrible—that is, would have been were it tenable—that Hilary
     for an instant felt herself shiver all over. The next she spoke out—in justice to him she
     forced herself to speak out—all her honest soul.
"I do believe that this going abroad to make a fortune, which young men so delight in, is
     often a most fatal mistake. They give up far more than they gain—country, home, health. I think
     a man has no right to sell his life any more than his soul for so many thousands a year."
Robert Lyon smiled—"No, and I am not selling mine. With my temperate habits I have as good a
     chance of health at Bombay as in London—perhaps better. And the years I must be absent I would
     have been absent almost as much from you—I mean they would have been spent in work as
     engrossing and as hard. They will soon pass, and then I shall come home rich—rich. Do you think
     I am growing mercenary?"
"No."
"Tell me what you do think about me?"
"I—can not quite understand."
"And I cannot make you understand. Perhaps I will, some day when I come back again. Till
     then, you must trust me, Hilary."
It happens occasionally, in moments of all but tolerable pain, that some small thing, a word,
     a look, a touch of a hand, lets in such a gleam of peace that nothing ever extinguishes the
     light of it: it burns on for years and years, sometimes clear, sometimes obscured, but as
     ineffaceable from life and memory as a star from its place in the heavens. Such, both then, and
     through the lonely years to come, were those five words, "You must trust me. Hilary."
She did; and in the perfection of that trust her own separate identity, with all its
     consciousness of pain, seemed annihilated; she did not think of herself at all, only of him,
     and with him, and for him. So, for the time being, she lost all sense of personal suffering,
     and their walk that night was as cheerful and happy as if they were to walk together for weeks
     and months and years, in undivided confidence and content, instead of its being the last—the
     very last.
Some one has said that all lovers have, soon or late, to learn to be only friends: happiest
     and safest are those in whom the friendship is the foundation—always firm and ready to fall
     back upon, long after the fascination of passion dies. It may take a little from the romance of
     these two if I own that Robert Lyon talked to Hilary not a word about love, and a good deal
     about pure business, telling her all his affairs and arrangements, and giving her as clear an
     idea of his future life as it was possible to do within the limits of one brief half hour.
Then casting a glance round, and seeing that Ascott was quite out of ear-shot, he said, with
     that tender fall of the voice that felt, as some poet hath it,
 "Like a still embrace,"
"Now tell me as much as you can about yourself."
At first there seemed nothing to tell; but gradually he drew from Hilary a good deal.
     Johanna's feeble health, which caused her continuing to teach to be very unadvisable; and the
     gradual diminishing of the school—from what cause they could not account—which made it very
     doubtful whether some change would not soon or late be necessary.
What this change should be she and Mr. Lyon discussed a little—as far as in the utterly
     indefinite position of affairs was possible. Also, from some other questions of his, she spoke
     to him about another dread which had lurked in her mind, and yet to which she could give no
     tangible shape, about Ascott. He could not remove it, he did not attempt; but he soothed it a
     little, advising with her as to the best way of managing the willful lad. His strong, clear
     sense, just judgment, and, above all, a certain unspoken sense of union, as if all that
     concerned her and hers he took naturally upon himself as his own, gave Hilary such comfort
     that, even on this night, with a full consciousness of all that was to follow, she was
     happy—nay, she had not been so happy for years. Perhaps (let the truth be told), the glorious
     truth of true love, that its recognition, spoken or silent, constitutes the only perfect joy of
     life that of two made perhaps she had never been so really happy since she was born.
The last thing he did was to make her give him an assurance that in any and all difficulty
     she would apply to him.
"To me, and to no one else, remember. No one but myself must help you. And I will, so, long
     as I am alive. Do you believe this?"
She looked up at him by the lamp light, and said, "I do."
"And you promise?"
"Yes."
Then they loosed arms, and Hilary knew that they should never walk together again till—when
     and how?
Returning, of course, he walked with Miss Leaf; and throughout the next day, a terribly wet
     Sunday, spent by them entirely in the little parlor, they had not a minute of special or
     private talk together. He did not seem to wish it; indeed, almost avoided it.
Thus slipped away the strange, still day—a Sunday never to be forgotten. At night, after
     prayers were, over, Mr. Lyon rose suddenly, saying he must leave them now; he was obliged to
     start from Stowbury at daybreak.
"Shall we not see you again?" asked Johanna.
"No. This will be my last Sunday in England. Good-by!"
He turned excessively pale, shook hands silently with them all—Hilary last—and almost before
     they recognized the fact, he was gone.
With him departed, not all Hilary's peace or faith or courage of heart, for to all who love
     truly, while the best beloved lives, and lives worthily, no parting is hopeless and no grief
     overwhelming; but all the brightness of her youth, all the sense of joy that young people have
     in loving, and in being beloved again, in fond meetings and fonder partings, in endless walks
     and talks, in sweet kisses and clinging arms. Such happiness was not for her: when she saw it
     the lot of others, she said to herself sometimes with a natural sharp sting of pain, but
     oftener with a solemn acquiescence, "It is the will of God; it is the will of God."
Johanna, too, who would have given her life almost to bring some color back to the white face
     of her darling, of whom she asked no questions, and who never complained nor confessed any
     thing, many and many a night when Hilary either lay awake by her side, or tossed and moaned in
     her sleep, till the elder sister took her in her arms like a baby—Johanna, too, said to
     herself, "This is the will of God."
I have told thus much in detail the brief sad story of Hilary's youth, to show how impossible
     it was that Elizabeth Hand could live in the house with these two women without being strongly
     influenced by them, as every person—especially every woman—influences for good or for evil
     every other person connected with her, or dependent upon her. Elizabeth was a girl of close
     observation and keen perception. Besides, to most people, whether or not their sympathy be
     universal, so far as the individual is concerned, any deep affection generally lends eyes,
     tact, and delicacy.
Thus when on the Monday morning at breakfast Miss Selina observed, "What a fine day Mr. Lyon
     was having for his journey; what a lucky fellow he was; how he would be sure to make a fortune,
     and if so, she wondered whether they should ever see or hear any thing of him again"—Elizabeth,
     from the glimpse she caught of Miss Hilary's face, and from the quiet way in which Miss Leaf
     merely answered, "Time will show;" and began talking to Selina about some other
     subject—Elizabeth resolved never in any way to make the smallest allusion to Mr. Robert Lyon.
     Something had happened, she did not know what; and it was not her business to find out; the
     family affairs, so far as she was trusted with them, were warmly her own, but into the family
     secrets she had no right to pry.
Yet, long after Miss Selina had ceased to "wonder" about him, or even to name him—his
     presence or absence did not touch her personally, and she was always the centre of her own
     small world of interest—the little maidservant kept in her mind, and pondered over at odd times
     every possible solution of the mystery of this gentleman's sudden visit; of the long wet Sunday
     when he sat all day talking with her mistresses in the parlor; of the evening prayer, when Miss
     Leaf had twice to stop, her voice faltered so; and of the night when, long after all the others
     had gone to bed, Elizabeth, coming suddenly into the parlor, had found Miss Hilary sitting
     alone over the embers of the fire, with the saddest, saddest look! so that the girl had softly
     shut the door again without ever speaking to "Missis."
Elizabeth did more; which, strange as it may appear, a servant who is supposed to know
     nothing of any thing that has happened can often do better than a member of the family who
     knows every thing, and this knowledge is sometimes the most irritating consciousness a sufferer
     has. She followed her young mistress with a steady watchfulness, so quiet and silent that
     Hilary never found it out; saved her every little household care, gave her every little
     household treat. Not much to do, and less to be chronicled; but the way in which she did it was
     all.
During the long dull winter days, to come in and find the parlor fire always bright, the
     hearth clean swept, and the room tidy; never to enter the kitchen without the servant's face
     clearing up into a smile; when her restless irritability made her forget things and grow quite
     vexed in the search after them, to see that somehow her shoes were never misplaced, and her
     gloves always came to hand in some mysterious manner—these trifles; in her first heavy days of
     darkness, soothed Hilary more than words could tell.
And the sight of Miss Hilary going about the house and school room as usual, with that poor
     white face of hers; nay, gradually bringing to the family fireside, as usual, her harmless
     little joke, and her merry laugh at it and herself—who shall say what lessons may not have been
     taught by this to the humble servant, dropping deep sown into her heart, to germinate and
     fructify, as her future life's needs required?
It might have been so—God knows! He alone can know, who, through what (to us) seem the
     infinite littleness of our mortal existence, is educating us into the infinite greatness of His
     and our immortality.
