
CHAPTER XIV.
When Miss Hilary reached home Elizabeth opened the door to her; the parlor was deserted.
Miss Leaf had gone to lie down, and Miss Selina was away to see the Lord Mayor's Show with
     Mr. Peter Ascott. 
"With Mr. Peter Ascott!" Hilary was a little surprised; but on second thoughts she found it
     natural; Selina was glad of any amusement—to her, not only the narrowness but the dullness of
     their poverty was inexpressibly galling. "She will be back to dinner, I suppose?"
"I don't know," said Elizabeth briefly.
Had Miss Hilary been less preoccupied, she would have noticed something not quite right about
     the girl—something that at any other time would have aroused the direct question, "What is the
     matter, Elizabeth?" For Miss Hilary did not consider it beneath her dignity to observe that
     things might occasionally go wrong with this solitary young woman, away from her friends, and
     exposed to all the annoyances of London lodgings; that many trifles might happen to worry and
     perplex her. If the mistress could not set them right, she could at least give the word of
     kindly sympathy, as precious to "a poor servant" as to the Queen on her throne.
This time, however, it came not, and Elizabeth disappeared below stairs immediately.
The girl was revolving in her own mind a difficult ethical question. To-day, for the first
     time in her life, she had not "told Miss Hilary every thing." Two things had happened, and she
     could not make up her mind as to whether she ought to communicate them.
Now Elizabeth had a conscience, by nature a very tender one, and which, from circumstances,
     had been cultivated into a much higher sensitiveness than, alas! is common among her class, or,
     indeed, in any class. This, if an error, was Miss Hilary's doing; it probably caused Elizabeth
     a few more miseries, and vexations, and painful shocks in the world than she would have had had
     she imbibed only the ordinary tone of morality, especially the morality of ordinary domestic
     servants; but it was an error upon which, in summing up her life, the Recording Angel would
     gravely smile.
The first trial had happened at breakfast time. Ascott, descending earlier than his wont, had
     asked her. Did any gentleman, short and dirty, with a hooked nose, inquire for him
     yesterday?
Elizabeth thought a minute, and recollected that some person answering the above not too
     flattering description had called, but refused to leave his name, saying he did not know the
     ladies, but was a particular friend of Mr. Leaf's.
Ascott laughed. "So he is—a very particular friend; but my aunts would not fancy him, and I
     don't want him to come here. Say, if he calls, that I'm gone out of town."
"Very well, sir. Shall you start before dinner?" said Elizabeth, whose practical mind
     immediately recurred to that meal, and to the joint, always contrived to be hot on the days
     that Ascott dined at home.
He seemed excessively tickled. "Bless you, you are the greatest innocent! Just say what I
     tell you, and never mind—hush! here's Aunt Hilary."
And Miss Hilary's anxious face, white with long wakefulness, had put out of Elizabeth's head
     the answer that was coming; indeed the matter slipped from her mind altogether, in consequence
     of another circumstance which gave her much more perplexity.
During her young mistress's absence, supposing Miss Selina out too, and Miss Leaf up stairs,
     she had come suddenly into the parlor without knocking. There, to her amazement, she saw Miss
     Selina and Mr. Ascott standing, in close conversation, over the fire. They were so engrossed
     that they did not notice her, and she shut door again immediately. But what confounded her was,
     that she was certain, absolutely certain, Mr. Ascott had his arm round Miss Selina's waist!
Now that was no business of hers, and yet the faithful domestic was a good deal troubled;
     still more so, when, by Miss Leaf's excessive surprise at hearing of the visitor who had come
     and gone, carrying Miss Selina away to the city, she was certain the elder sister was
     completely in the dark as to any thing going to happen in the family.
Could it be a wedding? Could Miss Selina really love, and be intending to marry, that horrid
     little man? For strange to say, this young servant had, what many a young beauty of rank and
     fashion has not, or has lost forever—the true, pure, womanly creed, that loving and marrying
     are synonymous terms; that to let a man put his arm round your waist when you do not intend to
     marry him, or to intend to marry him for money or any thing else when you do not really love
     him, are things quite impossible and incredible to any womanly mind. A creed somewhat out of
     date, and perhaps existing only in stray nooks of the world; but thank God! it does exist.
     Hilary had it, and she had taught it to Elizabeth.
"I wonder whether Miss Hilary knows of this? I wonder what she would say to it?"
And now arose the perplexing ethical question aforesaid, as to whether Elizabeth ought to
     tell her.
It was one of Miss Hilary's doctrines—the same for the kitchen as for the parlor, nay,
     preached strongest in the kitchen, where the mysteries of the parlor are often so cruelly
     exposed—that a secret accidentally found out should be kept as sacred as if actually confided;
     also, that the secret of an enemy should no more be betrayed than that of a beloved and
     trusting friend.
"Miss Selina isn't my enemy," smiled Elizabeth: "but I'm not overfond of her, and so I'd
     rather not tell of her, or vex her if I can help it. Any how, I'll keep it to myself for a
     bit."
But the secret weighed heavily upon her, and besides, her honest heart felt a certain
     diminution of respect for Miss Selina. What could she see to like in that common looking,
     commonplace man, whom she could not have met a dozen times, of whose domestic life she knew
     nothing, and whose personality Elizabeth, with the sharp observation often found in her class,
     probably because coarse people do not care to hide their coarseness from servants, had speedily
     set down at her own valuation—
"Neither carriage nor horses, nor nothing, will ever make him a gentleman?"
He, however, sent Miss Selina home magnificently in the said carriage; Ascott with her, who
     had been picked up somewhere in the City and who came in to his dinner, without the slightest
     reference to going "out of town."
But in spite of her Lord Mayor's Show, and the great attention which she said she had
     received from "various members of the Common Council of the City of London," Miss Selina was,
     for her, meditative, and did not talk quite so much as usual. There was in the little parlor an
     uncomfortable atmosphere, as if all of them had something on their minds. Hilary felt the ice
     must be broken, and if she did not do it nobody else would. So she said, stealing her hand into
     Johanna's under shelter of the dim fire-light, "Selina, I wanted to have a little family
     consultation. I have just received an offer."
"An offer!" repeated Miss Selina, with a visible start. "Oh, I forgot; you went to see your
     friend, Miss Balquidder, this morning. Did you get any thing out of her? Has she any nephews
     and nieces wanting a governess?"
"She has no relations at all. But I will just tell you the story of my visit."
"I hope it's interesting," said Ascott, who was lying on the sofa, half asleep, his general
     habit after dinner. He woke, however, during his Aunt Hilary's relation, and when she reached
     its climax, that the offer was for her to manage a stationer's shop, he burst out heartily
     laughing:
"Well, that is a rich idea. I'll come and buy of you. You'll look so pretty standing behind a
     counter."
But Selina said, angrily, "You cannot even think of such a thing. It would be a disgrace to
     the family."
"No," said Hilary, clasping tightly her eldest sister's hand—they two had already talked the
     matter over: "I can not see any disgrace. If our family is so poor that the women must earn
     their living as well as the men, all we have to see is that it should be honestly earned. What
     do you say, Ascott?"
She looked earnestly at him; she wanted sorely to find out what he really thought.
But Ascott took it, as he did every thing, very easily. "I don't see why Aunt Selina should
     make such a fuss. Why need you do anything, Aunt Hilary? Can't we hold out a little longer, and
     live upon tick till I get into practice? Of course, I shall then take care of you all; I'm the
     head of the family. How horribly dark this room is!"
He started up, and gave the fire a fierce poke, which consumed in five minutes a large lump
     of coal that Hilary had hoped—oh, cruel, sordid economy—would have lasted half the evening.
She broke the uneasy silence which followed by asking Johanna to give her opinion.
Johanna roused herself and spoke:
"Ascott says right; he is the head of the family, and, by-and-by. I trust will take care of
     us all. But he is not able to do it now, and meantime we must live."
"To be sure, we must Auntie."
"I mean, my boy, we must live honestly; we must not run into debt:" and her voice sharpened
     as with the reflected horror of her young days—if, alas! there ever had been any youth for
     Henry Leaf's eldest daughter. "No, Ascott, out of debt out of danger. For myself"—she laid her
     thin old fingers on his arm, and looked up at him with a pitiful mixture of reliance and
     hopelessness—"I would rather see you breaking stones in the road than living like a gentleman,
     as you call it, and a swindler, as I call it, upon other people's money."
Ascott sprang up, coloring violently. "You use strong language, Aunt Johanna. Never mind. I
     dare say you are right. However, it's no business of mine. Good-night, for I have an
     engagement."
Hilary said, gravely, she wished he would stay and join in the family consultation.
"Oh no; I bate talking over things. Settle it among yourselves. As I said, it isn't my
     business."
"You don't care, then, what becomes of us all? I sometimes begin to think so."
Struck by the tone, Ascott stopped in the act of putting on his lilac kid gloves. "What have
     I done? I may be a very bad fellow, but I'm not quite so bad as that. Aunt Hilary."
"She didn't mean it, my boy," said Aunt Johanna, tenderly.
He was moved, more by the tenderness than the reproach. He came and kissed his eldest aunt in
     that warm-hearted, impulsive way, which had won him forgiveness for many a boyish fault. It did
     so now.
"I know I'm not half good enough to you, Auntie, but I mean to be. I mean to work hard, and
     be a rich man some day; and then you may be sure I shall not let my Aunt Hilary keep a shop.
     Now, good-night, for I must meet a fellow on business—really business—that may turn out good
     for us all, I assure you."
He went away whistling, with that air of untroubled, good-natured liveliness peculiar to
     Ascott Leaf, which made them say continually that he was "only a boy," living a boy's life, as
     thoughtless and as free. When his handsome face disappeared the three women sat down again
     round the fire.
They made no comments on him whatever; they were women, and he was their own. But—passing him
     over as if he had never existed—Hilary began to explain to her sisters all particulars of her
     new scheme for maintaining the family. She told these details in a matter of-fact way, as
     already arranged; and finally hoped Selina would make no more objections.
"It is a thing quite impossible," said Selina, with dignity.
"Why impossible? I can certainly do the work; and it can not make me less of a lady. Besides,
     we had better not be ladies if we can not be honest ones. And, Selina, where is the money to
     come from? We have none in the house; we can not get any till Christmas."
"Opportunities might occur. We have friends."
"Not one in London; except, perhaps, Mr. Ascott, and I would not ask him for a farthing. You
     don't see, Selina, how horrible it would be to be helped, unless by some one dearly loved. I
     couldn't bear it! I'd rather beg, starve: almost steal!"
"Don't be violent, child."
"Oh, but it's hard!" and the cry of long-smothered pain burst out. "Hard enough to have to
     earn one's bread in a way one doesn't like; harder still to have to be parted from Johanna from
     Monday morning till Saturday night. But it must be, I'll go. It's a case between hunger, debt,
     and work: the first is unpleasant, the second impossible, the third is my only alternative. You
     must consent, Selina, for I will do it."
"Don't!" Selina spoke more gently, and not without some natural emotion. "Don't disgrace me,
     child; for I may as well tell you—I meant to do so to-night—Mr. Ascott has made me an offer of
     marriage, and I—I have accepted it." Had a thunder-bolt fallen in the middle of the parlor at
     No. 15, its inmates—that is, two of them—could not have been more astounded.
No doubt this surprise was a great instance of simplicity on their part. Many women would
     have prognosticated, planned the thing from the first; thought it a most excellent match; seen
     glorious visions of the house in Russell Square, of the wealth and luxury that would be the
     portion of "dear Selina," and the general benefit that the marriage would be to the whole Leaf
     family.
But these two were different from others. They only saw their sister Selina, a woman no
     longer young, and not without her peculiarities, going to be married to a man she knew little
     or nothing about—a man whom they themselves had endured rather than liked, and for the sake of
     gratitude. He was trying enough merely as a chance visitor; but to look upon Mr. Ascott as a
     brother-in-law, as a husband— "Oh, Selina! you can not be in earnest?"
"Why not? Why should I not be married as well as my neighbors?" said she, sharply.
Nobody arguing that point, both being indeed too bewildered to argue at all, she continued,
     majestically,
"I assure you, sisters, there could not be a more unexceptionable offer. It is true, Mr.
     Ascott's origin was rather humble; but I can overlook that. In his present wealth, and with his
     position and character, he will make the best of husbands."
Not a word was answered; what could be answered? Selina was free to marry if she liked, and
     whom she liked. Perhaps, from her nature, it was idle to expect her to marry in any other way
     than this; one of the thousand and one unions where the man desires a handsome, lady-like wife
     for the head of his establishment, and the woman wishes an elegant establishment to be mistress
     of; so they strike a bargain—possibly as good as most other bargains.
Still, with one faint lingering of hope, Hilary asked if she had quite decided.
"Quite. He wrote to me last night, and I gave him his answer this morning."
Selina certainly had not troubled any body with her "love affairs." It was entirely a matter
     of business. 
The sisters saw at once that she had made up her mind. Henceforward there could be no
     criticism of Mr. Peter Ascott.
Now all was told, she talked freely of her excellent prospects.
"He had behaved handsomely—very much so. He makes a good settlement on me, and says how happy
     he will be to help my family, so as to enable you always to make a respectable appearance."
"We are exceedingly obliged to him."
"Don't be sharp, Hilary. He means well. And he must feel that this marriage is a sort
     of—ahem! condescension on my part, which I never should have dreamed of twenty years ago."
Selina sighed; could it be at the thought of that twenty years ago? Perhaps, shallow as she
     seemed, this woman might once have had some fancy, some ideal man whom she expected to meet and
     marry; possibly a very different sort of man from Mr. Peter Ascott. However, the sigh was but
     momentary; she plunged back again into all the arrangements of her wedding, every one of which,
     down to the wedding-dress, she had evidently decided.
"And therefore you see," she added, as it the unimportant, almost forgotten item of
     discussion had suddenly occurred to her, "it's quite impossible that my sister should keep a
     shop. I shall tell Mr. Ascott, and you will see what he says to it."
But when Mr. Ascott appeared next day in solemn state as an accepted lover he seemed to care
     very little about the matter. He thought it was a good thing for every body to be independent;
     did not see why young women—he begged pardon, young ladies—should not earn their own bread if
     they liked. He only wished that the shop were a little further off than Kensington, and hoped
     the name of Leaf would not be put over the door.
But the bride-elect, indignant and annoyed, begged her lover to interfere, and prevent the
     scheme from being carried out.
"Don't vex yourself, my dear Selina," said he, dryly—how Hilary started to hear the stranger
     use the household name—"but I can't see that it's my business to interfere. I marry you, I
     don't marry your whole family."
"Mr. Ascott is quite right; we will end the subject," said Johanna, with grave dignity while
     Hilary sat with burning cheeks, thinking that, miserable as the family had been, it had never
     till now known real degradation.
But her heart was very sore that day. It the morning had come the letter from India never
     omitted, never delayed; Robert Lyon was punctual as clock-work in every thing he did. It came,
     but this month it was a short and somewhat sad letter—hinting of failing health, uncertain
     prospects; full of a bitter longing to come home, and a dread that it would be years before
     that longing was realized.
"My only consolation is," he wrote, for once betraying himself a little, "that however hard
     my life out here may be, I bear it alone."
But that consolation was not so easy to Hilary. That they two should be wasting their youth
     apart, when just a little heap of yellow coins—of which men like Mr. Ascott had such
     profusion—would bring them together; and, let trials be many or poverty hard, give them the
     unutterable joy of being once more face to face and heart to heart—oh, it was sore, sore!
Yet when she went up from the parlor, where the newly-affianced couple sat together,
     "making-believe" a passion that did not exist, and acting out the sham courtship, proper for
     the gentleman to pay and the lady to receive—when she shut her bedroom door, and there, sitting
     in the cold, read again and again Robert Lyon's letter to Johanna, so good, so honest; so sad,
     yet so bravely enduring—Hilary was comforted. She felt that true love, in its most unsatisfied
     longings, its most cruel delays, nay, even its sharpest agonies of hopeless separation, is
     sweeter ten thousand times than the most "respectable" of loveless marriages such as this.
So, at the week's end, Hilary went patiently to her work at Kensington, and Selina began the
     preparations for her wedding. 
