
CHAPTER XXII.
And now I leave Miss Hilary for a time; leave her in, if not happiness, great peace. Peace
     which, after these stormy months, was an actual paradise of calm to both herself and
     Johanna.
Their grief for Ascott had softened down. Its very hopelessness gave it resignation. There
     was nothing more to be done; they had done all they could, both to find him out and to save him
     from the public disgrace which might blight any hope of reformation. Now the result must be
     left in higher hands.
Only at times fits of restless trouble would come; times when a sudden knock at the door
     would make Johanna shake nervously for minutes afterward; when Hilary walked about every where
     with her mind preoccupied, and her eyes open to notice every chance passerby; nay, she had
     sometimes secretly followed down a whole street some figure which, in its light jaunty step and
     long fashionably-cut hair, reminded her of Ascott.
Otherwise they were not unhappy, she and her dearest sister. Poor as they were, they were
     together, and their poverty had no sting. They knew exactly how much they would receive
     monthly, and how much they ought to spend. Though obliged to calculate every penny, still their
     income and expenses were alike certain; there was no anxiety about money matters, which of
     itself was an indescribable relief. Also there was that best blessing—peace at home. Never in
     all her days had Johanna known such an easy life; sitting quietly in her parlor while Hilary
     was engaged in the shop below; descending to dinner, where she took the head of the table, and
     the young people soon learned to treat her with great respect and even affection; then waiting
     for the happy tea in their own room, and the walk afterward, in Richmond Park or along the
     Thames banks toward Twickenham. Perhaps it was partly from the contrast to that weary year in
     London, but never, in any spring, had the air seemed so balmy, or the trees so green. They
     brought back to Hilary's face the youthful bloom which she had begun to lose; and, in degree,
     her youthful brightness, which had also become slightly overclouded. Again she laughed and made
     her little domestic jokes, and regained her pretty ways of putting things, so that every thing
     always appeared to have a cheerful, and comical, side.
Also—for while we are made as we are, with capacity for happiness, and especially the
     happiness of love, it is sure to be thus—she had a little private sunbeam in her own heart,
     which brightened outside things. After that sad letter from India which came on Selina's
     wedding day, every succeeding one grew more cheerful, more demonstrative, nay, even
     affectionate; though still with that queer Scotch pride of his, that would ask for nothing till
     it could ask and have every thing, and give every thing in return—the letters were all
     addressed to Johanna.
"What an advantage it is to be an old woman!" Miss Leaf would sometimes say, mischievously,
     when she received them. But more often she said nothing, waiting in peace for events to develop
     themselves. She did not think much about herself, and had no mean jealousy over her child; she
     knew that a righteous and holy love only makes all natural affections more sacred and more
     dear.
And Hilary? She held her head higher and prouder; and the spring trees looked greener, and
     the river ran brighter in the sunshine. Ah, Heaven pity us all! it is a good thing to have love
     in one's life; it is a good thing, if only for a time, to be actually happy. Not merely
     contented, but happy!
And so I will leave her, this little woman; and nobody need mourn over her because she is
     working too hard, or pity her because she is obliged to work; has to wear common clothes, and
     live in narrow rooms, and pass on her poor weary feet the grand carriages of the Richmond
     gentry, who are not a bit more well-born or well-educated than she; who never take the least
     notice of her, except sometimes to peer curious at the desk where she sits in the shop-corner,
     and wonder who "that young person with the rather pretty curls" can be. No matter, she is
     happy.
How much happiness was there in the large house at Russell Square?
The Misses Leaf could not tell; their sister never gave them an opportunity of judging.
        "My son's my son till he gets him a wife,         But my daughter's my daughter all
     her life." 
And so, most frequently, is "my sister." But not in this case. It could not be; they never
     expected it would.
When on here rare visits to town Hilary called at Russell Square she always found Mrs. Ascott
     handsomely dressed, dignified, and gracious. Not in the slightest degree uncivil or unsisterly,
     but gracious—perhaps a thought too gracious. Most condescendingly anxious that she should stay
     to luncheon, and eat and drink the best the house afforded, but never by any chance inviting
     her to stay to dinner. Consequently, as Mr. Ascott was always absent in the city until dinner,
     Hilary did not see him for months together, and her brother-in-law was, she declared, no more
     to her than any other man upon 'Change, or the man in the moon, or the Great Mogul.
His wife spoke little about him. After a few faint, formal questions concerning Richmond
     affairs, somehow her conversation always recurred to her own: the dinners she had been at,
     those she was going to give; her carriages, clothes, jewelry, and so on. She was altogether a
     very great lady, and Hilary, as she avouched laughingly—it was, in this case, better to laugh
     than to grieve—felt an exceedingly small person beside her.
Nevertheless Mrs. Ascott showed no unkindness—nay, among the various changes that matrimony
     had produced in her, her temper appeared rather to have improved than otherwise; there was now
     seldom any trace of that touchy sharpness which used to be called "poor Selina's way." And yet
     Hilary never quitted the house without saying to herself, with a sigh, the old phrase, "Poor
     Selina!"
Thus, in the inevitable consequences of things, her visits to Russell Square became fewer and
     fewer; she kept them up as a duty, not exacting any return, for she felt that was impossible,
     though still keeping up the ghostly shadow of sisterly intimacy. Nevertheless she knew well it
     was but a shadow; that the only face that looked honest, glad welcome, or that she was honestly
     glad to see in her brother-in-law's house was the under house-maid, Elizabeth Hand.
Contrary to all expectations, Mrs. Ascott had consented to take Elizabeth into her service.
     With many stipulations and warnings never to presume on past relations, never even to mention
     Stowbury, on pain of instant dismissal—still, she did take her, and Elizabeth staid. At every
     one of Miss Hilary's visits, lying in wait in the bed chamber, or on the staircase, or creeping
     up at the last minute to open the hall door, was sure to appear the familiar face, beaming all
     over. Little conversation passed between them—Mrs. Ascott evidently disliked it; still
     Elizabeth looked well and happy, and when Miss Hilary told her so she always silently
     smiled.
But this story must tell the whole truth which lay beneath that fond acquiescing smile.
Elizabeth was certainly in good health, being well fed, well housed, and leading on the whole
     an easy life; happy, too, when she looked at Miss Hilary. But her migration from Mrs. Jones's
     lodgings to this grand mansion had not been altogether the translation from Purgatory to
     Paradise that some would have supposed.
The author of this simple story having—unfortunately for it—never been in domestic service,
     especially in the great houses of London, does not pretend to describe the ins and outs of
     their "high life below stairs;" to repeat kitchen conversations, to paint the humors of the
     servants' hall—the butler and housekeeper getting tipsy together, the cook courting the
     policeman, and the footman making love successively to every house-maid and ladys'-maid. Some
     writers have depicted all this, whether faithfully or not they know best; but the present
     writer declines to attempt any thing of the kind. Her business is solely with one domestic, the
     country girl who came unexpectedly into this new world of London servant-life—a world
     essentially its own, and a life of which the upper classes are as ignorant as they are of what
     goes on in Madagascar and Otabeite.
This fact was the first which struck the unsophisticated Elizabeth. She, who had been brought
     up in a sort of feudal relationship to her dear mistresses, was astonished to find the
     domestics of Russell Square banded together into a community which, in spite of their personal
     bickerings and jealousies, ended in alliance offensive and defensive against the superior
     powers, whom they looked upon as their natural enemies. Invisible enemies, certainly; for
     "master" they hardly ever saw; and, excepting the ladys' maid, were mostly as ignorant of
     "missis." The housekeeper was the middle link between the two estates—the person with whom all
     business was transacted, and to whom all complaints had to be made. Beyond being sometimes
     talked over, generally in a quizzical, depreciatory, or condemnatory way, the heads of the
     establishment were no more to their domestics than the people who paid wages, and exacted in
     return certain duties, which most of them made as small as possible, and escaped whenever they
     could.
If this be an exaggerated picture of a state of things perhaps in degree inevitable—and yet
     it should not be, for it is the source of incalculable evil, this dividing of a house against
     itself—if I have in any way said what is not true, I would that some intelligent "voice from
     the kitchen" would rise up and tell us what is true, and whether it be possible on either side
     to find means of amending what so sorely needs reformation.
Elizabeth sometimes wanted Tom Cliffe to do this—to "write a book," which he, eager young
     malcontent, was always threatening to do, upon the evils of society, and especially the tyranny
     of the upper classes. Tom Cliffe was the only person to whom she imparted her troubles and
     perplexities: how different her life was from that she had been used to; how among her
     fellow-servants there was not one who did not seem to think and act in a manner totally opposed
     to every thing she had learned from Miss Hilary. How consequently she herself was teased,
     bullied, threatened, or at best "sent to Coventry," from morning till night.
"I am quite alone, Tom—I am, indeed," said she, almost crying, the first Sunday night when
     she met him accidentally in going to church, and, in her dreary state of mind, was exceedingly
     glad to see him. He consoled her, and even went to church with her, half promising to do the
     same next Sunday, and calling her "a good little Christian, who almost inclined him to be a
     Christian too."
And so, with the vague feeling that she was doing him good and keeping him out of harm—that
     lad who had so much that was kindly and nice about him—Elizabeth consented, not exactly to an
     appointment, but she told him what were her "Sundays out," and the church she usually attended,
     if he liked to take the chance of her being there.
Alack! she had so few pleasures; she so seldom got even a breath of outside air—it was not
     thought necessary for servants. The only hour she was allowed out was the church-going on
     alternate Sunday evenings. How pleasant it was to creep out then, and see Tom waiting for her
     under the opposite trees, dressed so smart and gentlemanlike, looking so handsome and so glad
     to see her—her, the poor countrified Elizabeth, who was quizzed incessantly by her
     fellow-servants on her oddness, plainness, and stupidity.
Tom did not seem to think her stupid, for he talked to her of all his doings and plannings,
     vague and wild as those of the young tailor in "Alton Locke," yet with a romantic energy about
     them that strongly interested his companion; and he read her his poetry, and addressed a few
     lines to herself, beginning,
 "Dearest and best, my long familiar friend;"
which was rather a poetical exaggeration, since he had altogether forgotten her in the
     interval of their separation. But she never guessed this; and so they both clung to the early
     tie, making it out to be ten times stronger than it really was, as people do who are glad of
     any excuse for being fond of one another.
Tom really was getting fond of Elizabeth. She touched the higher half of his nature—the
     spiritual and imaginative half. That he had it, though only a working-man, and she too, though
     only a domestic servant, was most true: probably many more of their class have it than we are
     at all aware of. Therefore, these two being special individuals, were attracted by each other;
     she by him, because he was clever, and he by her, because she was so good. For he had an ideal,
     poor Tom Cliffe! and though it had been smothered and laid to sleep by a not too regular life,
     it woke up again under the kind, sincere eyes of this plain, simple-minded, honest Elizabeth
     Hand.
He knew she was plain, and so old-fashioned in her dress, that Tom, who was particular about
     such things, did not always like walking with her: but she was so interesting and true; she
     sympathized with him so warmly; he found her so unfailingly and unvaryingly good to him through
     all the little humors and pettishnesses that almost always accompany a large brain, a nervous
     temperament, and delicate health. Her quietness soothed him, her strength of character
     supported him; he at once leaned on her, and ruled over her.
As to Elizabeth's feelings toward Tom, they will hardly bear analyzing; probably hardly any
     strong emotion will, especially one that is not sudden but progressive. She admired him
     extremely, and yet she was half sorry for him. Some things in him she did not at all like, and
     tried heartily to amend. His nervous fancies, irritations, and vagaries she was exceedingly
     tender over; she looked up to him, and yet took care of him; this thought of him, and anxiety
     over him, became by degrees the habit of her life. People love in so many different ways; and
     perhaps that was the natural way in which a woman like Elizabeth would love, or creep into love
     without knowing it, which is either the safest or the saddest form which the passion can
     assume.
Thus things went on, till one dark, rainy Sunday night, walking round and round the inner
     circle of the square, Tom expressed his feelings. At first, in somewhat high flown and poetical
     phrases, then melting into the one, eternally old and eternally new, "Do you love me?" followed
     by a long, long kiss, given under shelter of the umbrella, and in mortal fear of the
     approaching policeman; who, however, never saw them, or saw them only as "pair of
     sweet-hearts"—too common an occurrence on his beat to excite any attention.
But to Elizabeth the whole thing was new, wonderful; a bliss so far beyond any thing that had
     ever befallen her simple life, and so utterly unexpected therein, that when she went to her bed
     that night she cried like a child over the happiness of Tom's loving her, and her exceeding
     unworthiness of the same.
Then difficulties arose in her mind. "No followers allowed," was one of the strict laws of
     the Russell Square dynasty. Like many another law of that and of much higher dynasties it was
     only made to be broken; for stray sweet-hearts were continually climbing down area railings, or
     over garden walls, or hiding themselves behind kitchen doors. Nay, to such an extent was the
     system carried out, each servant being, from self-interest, a safe co-conspirator, that very
     often when Mr. and Mrs. Ascott went out to dinner, and the old housekeeper retired to bed,
     there were regular symposia held below stairs—nice little supper-parties, where all the viands
     in the pantry and the wines in the cellar were freely used; where every domestic had his or her
     "young man" or "young woman," and the goings-on, though not actually discreditable, were of the
     most lively kind.
To be cognizant of these, and yet to feel that, as there was no actual wickedness going on,
     she was not justified in "blabbing," was a severe and perpetual trial to Elizabeth. To join
     them, or bring Tom among them as her "young man," was impossible.
"No, Tom," she said, when he begged hard to come in one evening—for it was raining fast, and
     he had a bad cough—
"No, Tom, I can't let you. If other folks break the laws of the house, I won't—you must go. I
     can only meet you out of doors."
And yet to do this surreptitiously, just as if she were ashamed of him, or as if there were
     something wrong in their being fond of one another, jarred upon Elizabeth's honest nature. She
     did not want to make a show of him, especially to her fellow-servants: she had the true woman's
     instinct of liking to keep her treasures all to herself; but she had also her sex's natural
     yearning for sympathy in the great event of a woman's life. She would have liked to have
     somebody unto whom she could say, "Tom has asked me to marry him," and who would have answered
     cordially, "It's all right: he is a good fellow: you are sure to be happy."
Not that she doubted this: but it would have been an additional comfort to have a mother's
     blessing, or a sister's, or even a friend's, upon this strange and sweet emotion which had come
     into her life. So long as it was thus kept secret there seemed a certain incompleteness and
     unsanctity about even their happy love.
Tom did not comprehend this at all. He only laughed at her for feeling so "nesh" (that means
     tender, sensitive—but the word is almost unexplainable to other than Stowbury ears) on the
     subject. He liked the romance and excitement of secret courtship—men often do; rarely women,
     unless there is something in them not quite right, not entirely womanly.
But Tom was very considerate, and though he called it "silly," and took a little fit of
     crossness on the occasion, he allowed Elizabeth to write to mother about him, and consented
     that on her next holiday she should go to Richmond, in order to speak to Miss Hilary on the
     same subject, and ask her also to write to Mrs. Hand, stating how good and clever Tom was, and
     how exceedingly happy was Tom's Elizabeth.
"And won't you come and fetch me, Tom?" asked she, shyly. "I am sure Miss Hilary would not
     object, nor Miss Leaf neither." 
Tom, protested he did not care two straws whether they objected or not; he was a man of
     twenty, in a good trade—he had lately gone back to the printing, and being a clever workman,
     earned capital wages. He had a right to choose whom he liked, and marry when he pleased. If
     Elizabeth didn't care for him, she might leave him alone.
"Oh, Tom!" was all she answered, with a strange gentleness that no one could have believed
     would ever have come into the manner of South Sea Islander. And quitting the subject then, she
     afterward persuaded him, and not for the first time, into consenting to what she thought right.
     There is something rather touching in a servant's holiday. It comes so seldom. She must count
     on it for so long beforehand, and remember it for so long afterward. This present writer owns
     to a strong sympathy with the holiday-makers on the grand gala-days of the English calendar. It
     is a pleasure to watch the innumerable groups of family folk, little, children, and prentice
     lands.
    —"Dressed in all their best,     To walk abroad with Sally." 
And the various "Sallys" and their corresponding swains can hardly feel more regret than she
     when it happens to be wet weather on Easter week or at Whitsuntide.
Whit-Monday, the day when Tom escaped from the printing-office, and Elizabeth got leave of
     absence for six hours, was as glorious a June day as well could be. As the two young people
     perched themselves on the top of the Richmond omnibus and drove through Kensington,
     Hammersmith, Turnham Green, and over Kew Bridge—Tom pointing out all the places, and giving
     much curious information about them—Elizabeth thought there never was a more beautiful country,
     or a more lovely summer day: she was, she truly said, "as happy as a Queen."
Neverthless, when the omnibus stopped, she, with great self-denial, insisted on getting rid
     of Tom for anytime. She thought Miss Hilary might not quite like Tom's knowing where she lived,
     or what her occupation was, lest he might gossip about it to Stowbury people; so she determined
     to pay her visit by herself, and appointed to meet him at a certain hour on Richmond Bridge,
     over which bridge she watched him march sulkily, not without a natural pleasure that he should
     be so much vexed at losing her company for an hour or two. But she knew he would soon come to
     himself—as he did, before he had been half a mile on the road to Hampton Court, meeting a young
     fellow he knew, and going with him over that grand old palace, which furnished them with a
     subject at their next debating society, where they both came out very strong on the question of
     hypocritical priests and obnoxious kings, with especial reference to Henry VIII, and Cardinal
     Wolsey.
Meanwhile Elizabeth went in search of the little shop—which nobody need expect to find at
     Richmond now—bearing the well-known name "Janet Balquidder." Entering it, for there was no
     private door, she saw, in the far corner above the curtained desk, the pretty curls of her dear
     Miss Hilary. Elizabeth had long known that her mistress "kept a shop," and with the notions of
     gentility which are just as rife in her class as in any other, had mourned bitterly over this
     fact. But when she saw how fresh and well the young lady looked, how busily and cheerfully she
     seemed to work with her great books before her, and with what a composed grace and dignity she
     came forward when asked for, Elizabeth secretly confessed that not even keeping a shop had made
     or could make the smallest difference in Miss Hilary.
She herself was much more changed.
"Why, Elizabeth, I should hardly have known you!" was the involuntary exclamation of her late
     mistress.
She certainly did look very nice; not smart—for her sober taste preferred quiet colors—but
     excessively neat and well-dressed. In her new gown of gray "coburg," her one handsome shawl,
     which had been honored several times by Miss Hilary's wearing, her white straw bonnet and white
     ribbons, underneath which the smooth black hair and soft eyes showed to great advantage, she
     appeared, not "like a lady"—a servant can seldom do that let her dress be ever so fine—but like
     a thoroughly respectable, intelligent, and pleasant-faced young woman.
And her blushes came and went so fast, she was so nervous and yet so beamingly happy, that
     Miss Hilary soon suspected there was more in this visit than at first appeared. Knowing that
     with Elizabeth's great shyness the mystery would never come out in public, she took an
     opportunity of asking her to help her in the bedroom, and there, with the folding-doors safely
     shut, discovered the whole secret. Miss Hilary was a good deal surprised at first. She had
     never thought of Elizabeth as likely to get married at all—and to Tom Cliffe.
"Why, isn't he a mere boy; ever so much younger than you are?"
"Three years."
"That is a pity—a great pity: women grow old so much faster than men."
"I know that," said Elizabeth, somewhat sorrowfully.
"Besides, did you not tell me he was very handsome and clever?"
"Yes: and I'm neither the one nor the other. I have thought all that over too, many a time;
     indeed I have, Miss Hilary. But Tom likes me—or fancies he does. Do you think"—and the intense
     humility which true love always has, struck into Miss Hilary's own conscious heart a conviction
     of how very true this poor girl's love must be. "Do you think he is mistaken? that his liking
     me—I mean in that sort of way—is quite impossible?"
"No, indeed, and I never said it; never thought it," was the earnest reply. "But consider;
     three years younger than yourself; handsomer and cleverer than you are—".
Miss Hilary stopped; it seemed so cruel to say such things, and yet she felt bound to say
     them. She knew her former "bower-maiden" well enough to be convinced that if Elizabeth were not
     happy in marriage she would be worse than unhappy—might grow actually bad.
"He loves you now; you are sure of that; but are you sure that he is a thoroughly stable and
     reliable character? Do you believe he will love you always?"
"I can't tell. Perhaps—if I deserved it," said poor Elizabeth.
And, looking at the downcast eyes, at the thorough womanly sweetness and tenderness which
     suffused the whole face, Hilary's doubts began to melt away. She thought how sometimes men,
     captivated by inward rather than outward graces, have fallen in love with plain women, or women
     older than themselves, and actually kept to their attachment through life, with a fidelity rare
     as beautiful. Perhaps this young fellow, who seemed by all accounts superior to his
     class—having had the sense to choose that pearl in an oyster-shell, Elizabeth Hand—might also
     have the sense so appreciate her, and go on loving her to the end of his days, Anyhow, he loved
     her now, and she loved him; and it was useless reasoning any more about it.
"Come, Elizabeth," cried her mistress, cheerfully, "I have said all my say, and now I have
     only to give my good wishes. If Tom Cliffe deserves you, I am sure you deserve him, and I
     should like to tell him so."
"Should you, Miss Hilary?" and with a visible brightening up Elizabeth betrayed Tom's
     whereabouts, and her little conspiracy to bring him here, and her hesitation lest it might be
     "intruding."
"Not at all. Tell him to come at once. I am not like my sister; we always allow 'followers.'
     I think a mistress stands in the relation of a parent, for the time being; and that can not be
     a right or good love which is concealed from her, as if it were a thing to be ashamed of."
"I think so too. And I'm not a bit ashamed of Tom, nor he of me," said Elizabeth, so
     energetically that Miss Hilary smiled.
"Very well; take him to have his tea in the kitchen, and then bring him up stairs to speak to
     my sister and me."
At that interview, which of course was rather trying, Tom acquitted himself to every body's
     satisfaction. He was manly, modest, self-possessed; did not say much—his usual talkativeness
     being restrained by the circumstances of the case, and the great impression made upon him by
     Miss Hilary, who, he afterward admitted to Elizabeth, "was a real angel, and he should write a
     poem upon her." But the little he did say gave the ladies a very good impression of the
     intelligence and even refinement of Elizabeth's sweet-heart. And though they were sorry to see
     him look so delicate, still there was a something better than handsomeness in his handsome
     face, which made them not altogether surprised at Elizabeth's being so fond of him. As she
     watched the young couple down Richmond Street, in the soft summer twilight—Elizabeth taking
     Tom's arm, and Tom drawing up his stooping figure to its utmost extent, both a little
     ill-matched in height as they were in some other things, but walking with that air of perfect
     confidence and perfect contentedness in each other which always betrays, to a quick eye, those
     who have agreed to walk through the world together—Miss Hilary turned from the window and
     sighed.
