<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Folle-Farine : VWWP edition </title><author>Ouida, [pseud.] (1839-1908)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHAPTER II.
IN one of the most fertile and most fair districts of northern France there was a
      little Norman town, very, very old and beautiful exceedingly by reason of its ancient streets,
      its high peaked roofs, its marvelous galleries and carvings, its exquisite greys and browns,
      its silence and its colour, and its rich still life.
Its centre was a great cathedral, noble as York or Chartres; a cathedral, whose spire shot
      to the clouds, and whose innumerable towers and pinnacles were all pierced to the day, so that
      they blue sky shone and the birds of the air flew all through them. A slow brown river, broad
      enough for market boats and for corn barges, stole through the place to the sea, lapping as it
      went the wooden piles of the houses, and reflecting the quaint shapes of the carvings, the
      hues of the signs and the draperies, the dark spaces of the dormer windows, the bright heads
      of some casement‐cluster of carnations, the laughing face of a girl leaning out to smile on
      her lover.
All around it lay the deep grass unshaven, the leagues on leagues of fruitful orchards, the
      low blue hills tenderly interlacing one another, the fields of colza, where the white
      head‐dress of the women workers flashed in the sun like a silvery pigeon’s wing. To the west
      there were the deep green woods, and the wide plains golden with gorse of Arthur’s and of
      Merlin’s lands; and beyond, to the northward, was the dim stretch of the ocean breaking on a
      yellow shore, whither the river ran, and wither led straight shady roads, hidden with linden
      and with poplar trees, and
       marked ever and anon by a wayside wooden Christ, or by a
      little murmuring well crowned with a crucifix.
A beautiful, old, shadowy, ancient place: picturesque everywhere; often silent, with a sweet
      sad silence that was chiefly broken by the sound of bells or the chaunting of choristers. A
      place of the Middle Ages still. With lanterns swinging on cords from house to house as the
      only light; with wondrous scroll‐works and quaint signs at the doors of all its traders; with
      monks’ cowls and golden croziers and white‐robed acolytes in its streets; with the subtle
      smoke of incense coming out from the cathedral door to mingle with the odours of the fruits
      and flowers in the market‐place; with great flat‐bottomed boats drifting down the river under
      the leaning eaves of its dwellings; and with the galeries of its opposing houses touching so
      nearly that a girl leaning on one could stretch a Provence rose or toss an Easter egg across
      to her neighbour in the other.
Doubtless, there were often squalor, poverty, dust, filth, and uncomeliness within these old
      and beautiful homes. Doubtless often the dwellers therein were housed like cattle and slept
      like pigs, and looked but once out the woods and waters of the landscapes round for one
      hundred times that they looked at their hidden silver in an old delf jug, or at their tawdry
      coloured prints of St. Victorian or St. Scævola.
But yet much of the beauty and the nobility of the old, simple, restful rich‐hued life of
      the past still abode there, and remained with them. In the straight, lithe form of their
      maidens, untrammelled by modern garb, and moving with the free majestic grace of forest does.
      In the vast, dim, sculptured chambers, where the grandam span by the wood fire, and the little
      children played in the shadows, and the lovers whispered in the embrasured window. In the
      broad market‐place, where the mules cropped the clover, and the tawny awnings caught the
      sunlight, and the white caps of the girls framed faces fitted for the pencils of the missal
      painters, and the flush of colour form mellow wall‐fruits and grape‐clusters glanced amidst
      the shelter of deepest freshest green. In the perpetual presence of their cathedral, which
      through sun and storm, through frost and summer, through noon and midnight stood there amidst
      them, and watched the galled oxen tread their painful way, and the
       scourged mules droop their humble heads, and the helpless
      harmless flocks go forth to the slaughter, and the old weary lives of the men and women pass
      through hunger and cold to the grave, and the sun and the moon rise and set, and the flowers
      and the children blossom and fade, and the endless years come and go, bringing peace, bringing
      war; bringing harvest, bringing famine; bringing life, bringing death; and beholding these,
      still said to the multitude in its terrible irony, “Lo! your God is Love.”
This little town lay far from the great Paris highway and all greatly frequented tracks. It
      was but a short distance from the coast, but near no harbour of greater extent than such as
      some small fishing village had made in the rocks for the trawlers. Few strangers ever came to
      it, except some wandering painters or antiquaries. It sent its apples and eggs, its poultry
      and honey, its colza and corn, to the use of the great cities; but it was rarely that any of
      its own people went thither.
Now and then some one of the oval‐faced, blue‐eyed, lithe‐limbed maidens of its little
      homely households would sigh and flush and grow restless, and murmur of Paris; and would steal
      out in the break of a warm grey morning whilst only the birds were still waking; and would
      patter away in her wooden shoes over the broad, white, southern road, with a stick over her
      shoulder, and a bundle of all her worldly goods upon the stick. And she would look back often,
      often, as she went; and when all was lost in the blue haze of distance save the lofty spire
      which she still saw through her tears, she would say in her heart, with her lips parched and
      trembling, “I will come back again.”
But none such ever did come back.
They came back no more than did the white sweet sheaves of the lilies which the women
      gathered and sent to be bought and sold in the city—to gleam one faint summer night in a
      gilded balcony, and to be flung out the next morning, withered and dead.
One amongst the few who had thus gone whither the lilies went, and of whom people would
      still talk as their mules paced homewards through the lanes at twilight, had been Reine
      Flamma, the daughter of the miller of Yprès.
Yprès was a beechen‐wooded hamlet on the northern out‐
       skirt of the town, a place of orchards and wooded tangle;
      through which there ran a branch of the brimming river, hastening to seek and join the sea,
      and caught a moment on its impetuous way, and forced to work by the grim millwheels that had
      churned the foam‐bells there for centuries. The millhouse was very ancient; its timbers were
      carved all over into the semblance of shields and helmets, and crosses, and fleur‐de‐lis, and
      its frontage was of quaint parqueted work, black and white, except where the old blazonries
      had been.
It had been handed down from sire to son of the same race through many generations—a race
      hard, keen, unlearned, superstitious, and caustic‐tongued—a race wedded to old ways, credulous
      of legend, chaste of life, cruel of judgement; harshly strong, yet ignorantly weak; a race
      holding dearer its heirloom of loveless, joyless, bigoted virtue even than those gold and
      silver pieces which had ever been its passion, hidden away in earthen pipkins under old
      apple‐roots, or in the crannies of wall timber, of in secret nooks of oaken cupboards.
Claude Flamma, the last of this toilsome, God‐fearing, man‐begrudging, Norman stock, was
      true to the type and the traditions of his people.
He was too ignorant even to read; but priests do not deem this a fault. He was avaricious;
      but may will honour a miser quicker than a spendthrift. He was cruel; but in the market‐place
      he always took heed to give his mare a full feed, so that if she were pinched of her hay in
      her stall at home none were the wiser, for she had no language but that of her wistful black
      eyes; and this is a speech to which men stay but little to listen. The shrewd, old,
      bitter‐tongued, stern‐living man was feared and respected with the respect that fear begets;
      and in truth he had a rigid virtue in his way, and was proud of it, with scorn for those who
      found it hard to walk less straightly and less circumspectly than himself.
He married late; his wife died in childbirth; his daughter grew into the perfection of
      womanhood under the cold, hard, narrow rule of his severity and his superstition. He loved
      her, indeed, with as much love as it was possible for him ever to feel, and was proud of her
      beyond all other things; saved for her, toiled for her, muttered ever that it
       was for her when at confession he related how his measures
      of flour had been falsely weighted, and how he had filched from the corn brought by the widow
      and the fatherless. For her he had sinned: from one to whom the good report of his neighbours
      and the respect of his own conscience were as the very breath of life, it was the strongest
      proof of love that he could give. But this love never gleamed one instant in his small sharp
      grey eyes, nor escaped ever by a single utterance from his lips. Reprimand, homily, or cynical
      rasping sarcasm, was all she ever heard from him. She believed that he despised, and almost
      hated her; he held it well for women to be tutored in subjection and in trembling.
At twenty‐two Reine Flamma was the most beautiful woman in Calvados, and the most
      wretched.
She was straight as a pine; cold as snow; graceful as a stem of wheat: lovely and silent;
      with a mute proud face, in which the eyes alone glowed with a strange, repressed, speechless
      passion and wishfulness. Her life was simple, pure, chaste, blameless, as the lives of the
      many women of her race who, before her, had lived and died in the shadow of that water‐fed
      wood had always been. Her father rebuked and girded at her, continually dreaming that he could
      paint whiter even the spotlessness of this lily, refine even the purity of this virgin
      gold.
She never answered him anything, nor in anything contradicted his will; not one amongst all
      the youths and maidens of her birthplace had ever heard so much as a murmur of rebellion from
      her; and the priests said that such a life as this would be fitter for the cloister than the
      marriage‐bed. None of them ever read the warning that these dark blue slumbering eyes would
      have given to any who should have had the skill to construe them right. There were none of
      such skill there; and so she, holding her peace, the men and women noted her ever with a
      curious dumb reverence, and said amongst themselves that the race of Flamma would die well and
      nobly in her.
“A saint!” said the good old gentle bishop of the district, as he blessed her one summer
      evening in her father’s house, and rode his mule slowly through the pleasant poplar lanes and
      breeze‐blown fields of colza back to his little quiet
       homestead, where he tended his own cabbages and garnered his
      own honey.
Reine Flamma bowed her tall head meekly, and took his benediction in silence.
The morning after, the miller, rising as his custom was at daybreak, and reciting his
      paternosters, thanked the Mother of the World that she had given him thus strength and power
      to rear up his motherless daughter in purity and peace. Then he dressed himself in his grey
      patched blouse, groped his way down the narrow stair, and went in his daily habit to undraw
      the bolts and unloose the chains of his dwelling.
There was no need that morning for him; the bolts were already back; the house‐door stood
      wide open; on the threshold a brown hen perched pluming herself; there were the ticking of the
      clock; the chirping of the birds, the rushing of the water; these were the only sounds upon
      the silence.
He called his daughter’s name: there was no answer. He mounted to her chamber: it had no
      tenant. He searched hither and thither, in the house, and the stable, and the granary: in the
      mill, and the garden, and the wood; he shouted, he ran, he roused his neighbours, he looked in
      every likely and unlikely place: there was no reply.
There was only the howl of the watch‐dog, who sat with his face to the south and mourned
      unceasingly.
And from that day neither he nor any man living there ever heard again of Reine Flamma.
Some indeed did notice that at the same time there disappeared from the town one who had
      been there through all that spring and summer. One who had lived strangely, and been clad in
      an odd rich fashion, and had been whispered as an Eastern prince by reason of his scattered
      gold, his unfamiliar tongue, his black‐browed, star‐eyed, deep‐hued beauty, like the beauty of
      the passion‐flower. But none had ever seen this stranger and Reine Flamma in each other’s
      presence; and the rumour was discredited as a foulness absurd and unseemly to be said of a
      woman whom their bishop had called a saint. So it died out, breathed only by a few mouths, and
      it came to be accepted as a fact that she must have perished in the deep fast‐flowing river by
      some false step on the mill‐timber, as she went at dawn to feed
       her doves, or by some strange sad trance of sleep‐walking,
      from which she had been known more than once to suffer.
Claudis Flamma said little; it was a wound that bled inwardly. He toiled, and chaffered, and
      drove hard bargains, and worked early and late with his hireling, and took for the household
      service an old Norman peasant‐woman more aged than himself, and told no man that he suffered.
      All that he ever said was, “She was a saint: God took her;” and in his martyrdom he found a
      hard pride and a dull consolation.
It was no mere metaphoric form of words with him. He believed in miracles and all manner of
      Divine interposition, and he believed likewise that she, his angel, being too pure for earth,
      had been taken by God’s own hand up to the bosom of Mary. This honour which had befallen his
      first‐begotten shed both sanctity and splendour on his cheerless days; and when the little
      children and the women saw him pass, they cleared from this way as from a prince’s, and
      crossed themselves as they changed words with one whose daughter was the bride of Christ.
So six years passed away; and the name of Reine Flamma was almost forgotten, but embalmed in
      memories of religious sanctity, as the dead heart of a saint is embedded in amber and
      myrrh.
At the close of the sixth year there happened what many said was a thing devil‐conceived and
      wrought out by the devil to the shame of a pure name, and to the hindrance of the people of
      God.
One winter’s night Claudis Flamma was seated in his kitchen, having recently ridden home his
      mare from the market in the town.
The fire burned in ancient fashion on the hearth, and it was so bitter without that even his
      parsimonious habits had relaxed, and he had piled some wood, liberally mingled with dry moss,
      that cracked, and glowed, and shot flame up the wide black shaft of the chimney.
The day’s work was over; the old woman‐servant sat spinning flax on the other side of the
      fire; the great mastiff was stretched sleeping quietly on the brick floor; the blue pottery,
      the brass pans, the oaken presses that had been the riches of his race for generations,
      glimmered in the light; the doors were barred, the shutters closed; around the
       house the winds howled, and beneath its walls the fretting
      water hissed.
The miller, overcome with the past cold and present warmth, nodded on his wooden settle and
      slept, and muttered dreamily in his sleep, “A saint—a saint!—God took her.”
The old woman, hearing, looked across at him, and shook her head, and went on with her
      spinning with lips that moved inaudibly: she had been wont to say, out of her taskmaster’s
      hearing, that no women who was beautiful was ever a saint as well. And some thought that this
      old creature, Marie Pitchou, who had used to live in a miserable hut on the other side of the
      wood, had known more than she had chosen to tell of the true fate of Reine Flamma.
Suddenly a blow on the panels of the door sounded through the silence. The miller, awakened
      in a moment, started to his feet and grasped his ash staff with one hand, and with the other
      the oil‐lamp burning on the tressel. The watch‐dog arose, but made no hostile sound.
A step crushed the dead leaves without and passed away faintly; there was stillness again;
      the mastiff went to the bolted door, smelt beneath it, and scratched at the panels.
On the silence there sounded a small, timid, feeble beating on the wood from without; such a
      slight fluttering noise as a wounded bird might make in striving to rise.
“It is nothing evil,” muttered Flamma. “If it were, evil the beast would not want to have
      the door opened. It may be some one sick or stray.”
All this time he was in a manner charitable, often conquering the niggardly instincts of his
      character to try and save his soul by serving the wretched. He was a miser, and he loved to
      gain, and loathed to give; but since his daughter had been taken to the saints he had striven
      with all his might to do good enough to be taken likewise to that heavenly rest.
Any crust bestowed on the starveling, any bed of straw afforded to the tramp, caused him a
      sharp pang; but since his daughter had been taken he had tried to please God by this
      mortification of his own avarice and diminution of his own gains. He could not vanquish the
      nature that was engrained in him. He would rob the widow of an ephah of wheat, and leave his
      mare famished in her stall, because
       it was his nature to find in all such saving a sweet savour;
      but he would not turn away a beggar or refuse a crust to a wayfarer, lest, thus refusing, he
      might turn away from him an angel unawares.
The mastiff scratched still at the panels; the sound outside had ceased.
The miller, setting the lamp down on the floor, gripped more firmly the ashen stick, undrew
      the bolts, turned the stout key, and opened the door slowly, and with caution. A loud gust of
      wind blew dead leaves against his face; a blinding spray of snow scattered itself over his
      bent stretching form. In the darkness without, whitened from head to foot, there stood a
      little child.
The dog went up to her and licked her face with kindly welcome. Claudis Flamma drew her with
      a rough grasp across the threshold, and went out into the air to find whose footsteps had been
      those which had trodden heavily away after the first knock.
The snow, however, was falling fast; it was a cloudy moonless night. He did not dare to go
      many yards from his own portals, lest he should fall into some ambush set by robbers. The
      mastiff too was quiet which indicated that there was no danger near, so the old man returned,
      closed the door carefully, drew the bolts into their places, and came towards the child, whom
      the woman Pitchou had drawn towards the fire.
She was a child of four or five years old; huddled in coarse linen and in a little red
      garment of fox’s skin, and blanched from head to foot, for the flakes were frozen on her and
      on the hood that covered, gipsy‐like, her curls. It was a strange, little, ice‐cold,
      ghost‐like figure, but out of the mass of icicles and whiteness there glowed great beaming
      frightened eyes and a mouth like a scarlet berry; the radiance and the contrast of it were
      like the glow of holly fruit thrust our from a pile of drifted snow.
The miler shook her by the shoulder.
“Who brought you?”
“Phratos,” answered the child, with a stifled sob in her throat.
“And who is that?”
“Phratos,” answered the child again.
“Is that a man or a woman?”

The child made no reply; she seemed not to comprehend his meaning. The miller shook her
      again, and some drops of water fell from the ice that was dissolving in the warmth.
“Why are you come here?” he asked, impatiently.
She shook her head, as though to say none knew so little of herself as she.
“You must have a name,” he pursued harshly and in perplexity. “What are you called? Who are
      you?”
The child suddenly raised her great eyes that had been fastened on the leaping flames, and
      flashed them upon his in a terror of bewildered ignorance—the piteous terror of a stray
      dog.
“Phratos,” she cried once more, and the cry now was half a sigh, half a shriek.
Something in that regard pierced him and startled him; he dropped his hand off her shoulder,
      and breathed quickly; the old woman gave a low cry, and staring with all her might at the
      child’s small dark, fierce, lovely face, fell to counting her wooden beads and mumbling many
      prayers.
Claudis Flamma turned savagely on her as if stung by some unseen snake, and willing to wreak
      his vengeance on the nearest thing that was at hand.
“Fool! cease your prating!” he muttered, with a brutal oath. “Take the animal and search
      her. Bring me what you find.”
Then he sat down on the stool by the fire, and braced his lips tightly, and locked his bony
      hands upon his knees. He knew what blow awaited him; he was no coward, and he had manhood
      enough in him to press any iron into his soul and tell none that it hurt him.
The old woman drew the stranger aside to a dusky corner of an inner chamber, and began to
      despoil her of her coverings. The creature did not resist; the freezing cold and long fatigue
      had numbed and silenced her: her eyelids were heavy with the sleep such cold produces, and she
      had not strength, because she had not consciousness enough, to oppose whatsoever they might
      choose to do to her. Only now and then her eyes opened, as they had opened on him, with a
      sudden lustre and fierceness, like those in a netted animal’s impatient but untamed
      regard.
Pitchou seized and searched her eagerly, stripping her of
       her warm fox‐skin wrap, her scarlet hood of wool, her little
      rough hempen shirt, which were all dripping with the water from the melted snow.
The skin of the young waif was brown, with a golden bloom on it; it had been tanned by hot
      suns, but it was soft as silk in texture, and transparent, showing the course of each blue
      vein. Her limbs were not well nourished, but they were of perfect shaped and delicate bone;
      and the feet were the long, arched, slender feet of the southern side of the Pyrenees.
She allowed herself to be stripped and wrapped in a coarse piece of homespun linen; she was
      still half frozen, and in a state of stupor, either from amazement or from fear. She was quite
      passive, and she never spoke. Her apathy deceived the old crone, who took it for docility, and
      who, trusting to it, proceeded to take advantage of it, after the manner of her kind. About
      the small shapely head there hung a band of glittering coins; they were not gold, but the
      woman Pitchou thought they were, and seized them with gloating hands and ravenous eyes.
The child started from her torpor, shook herself free, and fought to guard them—fiercely,
      with tooth and nail, as the young fox whose skin she had worn might have fought for its dear
      life. The old woman on her side strove as resolutely; long curls of the child’s hair were
      clutched in the struggle; she did not wince or scream, but she fought—fought with all the
      breath and blood that were in her tiny body.
She was no match, with all her ferocity and fury, for the sinewy grip of the old peasant;
      and the coins were torn off her forehead and hidden away in a hole in the wood, out of her
      sight, where the old peasant hoarded all her precious treasures of copper coins and other
      trifles that she managed to secrete from her master’s all‐seeing eyes.
They were little metal sequins engraved with Arabic characters, chained together after the
      Eastern fashion. To Pitchou they looked a diadem of gold worthy of an empress.
The child watched them thus removed in perfect silence; from the moment they had been
      wrenched away, and the battle had been finally lost to her, she had ceased to struggle, as
      though disdainful of a fruitless contest. But a
       great hate gathered in her eyes, and smouldered there like a
      half‐stifled fire—it burnt on for many a long year afterwards, unquenched.
When Pitchou brought her a cup of water and a roll of bread, she would neither eat nor
      drink, but turned her face to the wall,—mute.
“Those are just her father’s eyes,” the old woman muttered. She had seen them burn in the
      gloom of the evening through the orchard trees, as the stars had risen, and Reine Flamma
      listened to the voice that wooed her to her destruction.
She let the child be, and searched her soaked garments for any written word or any token
      that might be on them. Fastened roughly to the fox’s skin there was a faded letter. Pitchou
      could not read; she took it to her master.
Claudis Flamma grasped the paper and turned its superscription to the light of the lamp.
He could not read, by yet at sight of the characters his tough frame trembled, and his
      withered skin grew red with a sickly, feverish quickening of the blood.
He knew them.
Once, in a time long dead, he had been proud of those slender letters that had been so far
      more legible than any that the women of her class could pen, and on beholding which the good
      bishop had smiled, and passed a pleasant word concerning her being almost fitted to be his own
      clerk and scribe.
For a moment, watching those written cyphers that had no tongue for him, and yet seemed to
      tell their tale so that they scorched and withered up all the fair honour and pious peace of
      his old age, a sudden faintness, a sudden swooning sense seized him for the first time in all
      his life; his limbs failed him, he sank down on his seat again, he gasped for breath; he
      needed not to be told anything, he knew all. He knew that the creature whom he had believed so
      pure that God had deemed the earth unworthy of her youth was—his throat rattled, his lips were
      covered with foam, his ears were filled with a rushing, hollow sound, like the roaring of his
      own mill‐waters in a time of storm.
All at once he started to his feet, and glared at the empty space of the dim chamber, and
      struck his hands wildly together in the air, and cried aloud:

“She was a saint, I said—a saint! A saint in body and soul! And I thought that God begrudged
      her, and held her too pure for man!”
And he laughed aloud—thrice.
The child hearing, and heavy with sleep, and eagerly desiring warmth, as a little frozen
      beast that coils itself in snow to slumber into death, startled by that horrible mirth, came
      forward.
The shirt fell off her as she moved. Her little naked limbs glimmered like gold in the dusky
      light; her hair was as a cloud behind her; her little scarlet mouth was half open, like the
      mouth of a child seeking its mother’s kiss; her great eyes, dazzled by the flame, flashed and
      burned and shone like stars. They had seen the same face ere then in Calvados.
She came straight to Claudis Flamma as though drawn by that awful and discordant laughter,
      and by that leaping ruddy flame upon the hearth, and she stretched out her arms and muttered a
      word and smiled, a little dreamily, seeking to sleep, asking to be caressed, desiring she knew
      not what.
He clenched his fist, and struck her to the ground. She fell without a sound. The blood
      flowed from her mouth.
He looked at her where she lay, and laughed once more. “She was a saint!—a saint! And the
      devil begot in her that!”
Then he went our across the threshold and into the night, with the letter still clenched in
      his hand.
The snow fell, the storm raged, the earth was covered with ice and water; he took no heed,
      but passed through it, his head bare and his eyes blind.
The dog let him go forth alone, and waited by the child.
</div></body></text></TEI>