<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Folle-Farine : VWWP edition </title><author>Ouida, [pseud.] (1839-1908)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="32">
CHAPTER VII.
WHEN the dawn came, it found her lying face downward among the rushes by the river.
      She had run on, and on, and on blindly, not knowing where she fled, with the strange force
      which despair lends; then suddenly had dropped, as a young bull drops in the circus with the
      steel sheathed in its brain. There she had remained insensible, the blood flowing a little
      from her mouth.
It was quite lonely by the waterside. A crane among the sedges, an owl on the wind, a
      water‐lizard under the stones, such were the only moving things. It was in a solitary bend of
      the stream; its banks were green and quiet; there were no dwellings near; and there was no
      light anywhere, except the dull glow of the lamp above the Calvary.
No one found her. A young fox came and smelt at her, and stole frightened away. That was
      all. A sharp wind rising with the reddening of the east blew on her, and recalled her to
      consciousness after many hours. When her eyes at length opened, with a blank stare upon the
      greyness of the shadows, she lifted herself a little and sat still, and wondered what had
      chanced to her.
The first rays of the sun rose over the dim blue haze of the horizon. She looked at it and
      tried to remember, but failed. Her mind was sick and dull.
A little beetle, green and bronze, climbed in and out amongst the sand of the river‐shore;
      her eyes vacantly followed the insect’s aimless circles. She tried to think, and could not;
      her thoughts went feebly and madly round and round, round and round, as the beetle went in his
      maze of sand. It was all so grey, so still, so chill, she was afraid of it. Her limbs were
      stiffened by the exposure and dews of the night. She shivered and was cold.
The sun rose—a globe of flame above the edge of the world.
Memory flashed on her with its light.
She rose a little, staggering and blind, and weakened by
       the loss of blood; she crept feebly to the edge of the
      stream, and washed the stains from her lips, and let her face rest a little in the sweet,
      silent, flowing water.
Then she sat still amidst the long rush‐like grass, and thought, and thought, and wondered
      why life was so tough and merciless a thing, that it would ache on, and burn on, and keep
      misery awake to know itself even when its death‐blow had been dealt, and the steel was in its
      side.
She was still only half sensible of her wretchedness. She was numbed by weakness, and her
      brain seemed deadened by a hot pain, that shot through it as with tongues of flame.
The little beetle at her feet was busied in a yellower soil than sand. He moved round and
      round in a little dazzling heap of coins, and trembling paper thin as gauze. She saw it
      without seeing for awhile; then, all at once, a knowledge flashed on her. She saw that the
      money had fallen from her tunic. She guessed the truth—that in his last embrace he had slid
      into her bosom half that sum whereof he had spoken as the ransom which had set him free.
Her bloodless face grew scarlet with an immeasurable shame. She would have suffered far less
      if he had killed her.
He who denied her love to give her gold!
Better that, when he had kissed her, he had covered her eyes softly with one hand, and with
      the other driven his knife straight through the white warmth of her breast.
The sight of the gold stung her like a snake.
Gold!—such wage as men flung to the painted harlots gibing at the corners of the
      streets!
The horror of the humiliation filled her with loathing of herself. Unless she had become
      shameful in his sight, she thought, he could not have cast this shame upon her.
She gathered herself slowly up, and stood and looked with blind aching eyes at the splendour
      of the sunrise.
Her heart was breaking.
Her one brief dream of gladness was severed sharply, as with a sword, and killed for
      ever.
She did not reason—all thought was stunned with her; but as a woman, who loves looking on
      the face she loves, will see sure death written there long ere any other can detect it, so she
      knew, by the fatal and unerring instinct of
       passion, that he was gone from her as utterly and as
      eternally as though his grave had closed on him.
She did not even in her own heart reproach him. Her love for him was too perfect to make
      rebuke against him possible to her. Had he not a right to go as he would, to do as he chose,
      to take her or leave her, as best might seem to him? Only he had no right to shame her with
      what he had deemed shame to himself; no right to insult what he had slain.
She gathered herself slowly up, and took his money in her hand, and went along the river
      bank.
Whither?
She had no knowledge at first; but, as she moved against the white light and the cool
      currents of the morning air, her brain cleared a little. The purpose which had risen in her
      slowly matured and strengthened; without its sustenance she would have sunk down and perished,
      like a flower cut at the root.
Of all the world that lay beyond the pale of those golden and russet orchards and scarlet
      lakes of blowing poppies she had no more knowledge than the lizard at her feet.
Cities, he had often said, were as fiery furnaces that consumed all youth and innocence
      which touched them: for such as she to go to them was, he had often said, to cast a luscious
      and golden peach of the summer into the core of a wasp’s nest. Nevertheless, her mind was
      resolute to follow him,—to follow him unknown by him; so that, if his footsteps turned to
      brighter paths, her shadow might never fall across his ways; but so that, if need were, if
      failure still pursued him, and by failure came misery and death, she would be there beside
      him, to share those fatal gifts which none would dispute with her or grudge.
To follow him was to her an instinct as natural and as irresistible as it is to the dog to
      track his master’s wanderings.
She would have starved ere she would have told him that she hungered. She would have
      perished by the roadside ere ever she would have cried to him that she was homeless. She would
      have been torn asunder for a meal by wolves ere she would have bought safety or succour by one
      coin of that gold he had slid in her bosom, like the wages of a thing that was vile.

But to follow him she never hesitated: unless this had been possible to her, she would have
      refused to live another hour. The love in her, at once savage and sublime, at once strong as
      the lion’s rage and humble as the camel’s endurance, made her take patiently all wrongs at his
      hands, but made her powerless to imagine a life in which he was not.
She went slowly now through the country, in the hush of the waking day.
He had said that he would leave at dawn.
In her unconscious agony of the night gone by, she had run far and fast ere she had fallen;
      and now, upon her waking, she had found herself some league from the old mill‐woods, and
      further yet from the tower on the river where he dwelt.
She was weak, and the way seemed very long to her; ever and again, too, she started aside
      and hid herself, thinking each step were his. She wanted to give him back his gold, yet she
      felt as though one look of his eyes would kill her.
It was long, and the sun was high, ere she had dragged her stiff and feeble limbs through
      the long grasses of the shore and reached the ruined granary. Crouching down, and gazing
      through the spaces in the stones from which so often she had watched him, she saw at once that
      the place was desolate.
The great Barabbas, and the painted panels and canvases, and all the pigments and tools and
      articles of an artist’s store, were gone: but the figures on the walls were perforce left
      there to perish. The early light fell full upon them, sad and calm and pale, living their life
      upon the stone.
She entered and looked at them.
She loved them greatly; it pierced her heart to leave them there—alone.
The bound Helios working at the mill, with white Hermes watching, mute and
      content,—Persephone crouching in the awful shadow of the dread winged King,—the Greek youths,
      with doves in their breasts and golden apples in their hands,—the women dancing upon Cithæron,
      in the moonlight,—the young gladiator wrestling with the Libyan lion,—all the familiar shapes
      and stories that made
       the grey walls teem with the old sweet life of the heroic
      times, were there—left to the rat and the spider, the dust and the damp, the slow, sad death
      of a decay which no heart would sorrow for, nor any hand arrest.
The days would come and go, the suns would rise and set, the nights would fall, and the
      waters flow, and the great stars throb above in the skies, and they would be there—alone.
To her they were living things, beautiful and divine; they were bound up with all the hours
      of her love; and at their feet she had known the one brief dream of ecstacy that had sprung up
      for her, great and golden as the prophet’s gourd, and as the gourd in a night had
      withered.
She held them in a passionate tenderness—these, the first creatures who had spoken to her
      with a smile, and had brought light in to the darkness of her life. She flung herself on the
      ground and kissed its dust, and prayed for them in an agony of prayer—prayed for them that the
      hour might come, and come quickly, when men would see the greatness of their maker, and would
      remember them, and seek them, and bear them forth in honour and in worship to the nations. She
      prayed in an agony; prayed blindly, and to whom she knew not; prayed, in the sightless
      instinct of the human heart, towards some greater strength which could bestow at once
      retribution and consolation.
Nor was it so much for him as for them that she thus prayed: in loving them she had reached
      the pure and impersonal passion of the artist. To have them live, she would have given her own
      life.
Then the bonds of her torment seemed to be severed; and, for the first time, she fell into a
      passion of tears, and stretched there on the floor of the forsaken chamber, wept as women weep
      upon a grave.
When she arose, at length, she met the eyes of Hypnos and Oneiros and Thanatos—the gentle
      gods who give forgetfulness to men.
They were her dear gods, her best beloved and most compassionate; yet their looks struck
      coldly to her heart.
Sleep, Dreams, and Death,—were these the only gifts with which the gods, being merciful,
      could answer prayer?
</div></body></text></TEI>