<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Heir of Redclyffe</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary
     History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1853</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="39">
CHAPTER XVII.

Beneath a tapering ash-tree's shade,
   Three graves are by each other laid.
Around the very place doth brood
   A strange and holy quietude.
Baptistery. 
Late on the afternoon of the 6th of March, Mary Ross entered by the half-open front door at
      Hollywell, just as Charles appeared slowly descending the stairs.
'Well! how is she?' asked Mary, eagerly.
'Poor little dear!' he answered, with a sigh; 'she looks very nice and comfortable.'
'What, you have seen her?'
'I am this moment leaving her room.'
'She is going on well, I hope?'
'Perfectly well. There is one comfort at least,' said Charles, drawing himself down the last
      step.
'Dear Amy! And the babe—did you see it?'
'Yes; the little creature was lying by her, and she put her hand on it, and gave one of
      those smiles that are so terribly like his; but I could not have spoken about it for the
      world. Such fools we be!' concluded Charles, with an attempt at a smile.
'It is healthy?'
'All a baby ought to be, they say, all that could be expected of it, except the not being of
      the right sort, and if Amy does not mind that, I don't know who should,' and Charles deposited
      himself on the sofa, heaving a deep sigh, intended to pass for the conclusion of the
      exertion.

'Then you think she is not disappointed?'
'Certainly not. The first thing she said when she was told it was a girl was, 'I'm so glad!'
      and she does seem very happy with it, poor little thing! In fact, mamma thinks she had so
      little expected that it would go well with herself, or with it, that now it is all like a
      surprise.'
There was a silence, first broken by Charles saying, 'You must be content with me—I can't
      send for any one. Bustle has taken papa and Charlotte for a walk, and Laura is on guard over
      Amy, for we have made mamma go and lie down. It was high time, after sitting up two nights,
      and meaning to sit up a third.'
'Has she really—can she bear it?'
'Yes; I am afraid I have trained her in sitting up, and Amy and all of us know that anxiety
      hurts her more than fatigue. She would only lie awake worrying herself, instead of sitting
      peaceably by the fire, holding the baby, or watching Amy, and having a quiet cry when she is
      asleep. For, after all, it is very sad!' Charles was trying to brave his feelings, but did not
      succeed very well. 'Yesterday morning I was properly frightened. I came into the
      dressing-room, and found mamma crying so, that I fully believed it was all wrong; but she was
      just coming to tell us, and was only overcome by thinking of not having him to call
      first, and how happy he would have been.'
'And the dear Amy herself?'
'I can't tell. She is a wonderful person for keeping herself composed when she ought. I see
      she has his picture in full view, but she says not a word, except that mamma saw her to-day,
      when she thought no one was looking, fondling the little thing, and whispering to it,—'Guy's
      baby!' and 'Guy's little messenger!' Charles gave up the struggle, and fairly cried, but in a
      moment rallying his usual tone, he went on, half laughing,— 'To be sure, what a morsel of a
      creature it is! It is awful to see anything so small calling itself a specimen of
      humanity!'

'It is your first acquaintance with infant humanity, I suppose? Pray, did you ever see a
      baby?'
'Not to look at. In fact, Mary, I consider it a proof of your being a rational woman that
      you have not asked me whether it is pretty.'
'I thought you no judge of the article.'
'No, it was not to inspect it that Amy sent for me; though after all it was for a business I
      would almost as soon undertake, a thing I would not do for any other living creature.'
'Then I know what it is. To write some kind message to Captain Morville. Just like the dear
      Amy!'
'Just like her, and like no one else, except—Of course my father wrote him an official
      communication yesterday, very short; but the fact must have made it sweet enough, savage as we
      all were towards him, as there was no one else to be savage to, unless it might be poor Miss
      Morville, who is the chief loser by being of the feminine gender,' said Charles, again braving
      what he was pleased to call sentimentality. 'Well, by-and-by, my lady wants to know if any one
      has written to 'poor Philip,' as she will call him, and, by no means contented by
      hearing papa had, she sends to ask me to come to her when I came in from wheeling in the
      garden; and receives me with a request that I would write and tell him how well she is, and
      how glad, and so on. There's a piece of work for me!'
'Luckily you are not quite so savage as you pretend, either to him, or your poor little
      niece.'
'Whew! I should not care whether she was niece or nephew but for him; at least not much, as
      long as she comforted Amy: but to see him at Redclyffe, and be obliged to make much of him at
      the same time, is more than I can very well bear; though I may as well swallow it as best I
      can, for she will have me do it, as well as on Laura's account. Amy believes, you know, that
      he will think the inheritance a great misfortune;
       but that is only a proof that she is more amiable than any one else.'
'I should think he would not rejoice.'
'Not exactly; but I have no fear that he will not console himself by thinking of the good he
      will do with it. I have no doubt that he was thoroughly cut up, and I could even go the length
      of believing that distress of mind helped to bring on the relapse; but it is some time ago.
      And as to his breaking his heart after the first ten minutes at finding himself what he has
      all his life desired to be, in a situation where the full influence of his talents may be
      felt,' said Charles, with a shade of imitation of his measured tones, 'why that, no one but
      silly little Amy would ever dream of.'
'Well, I dare say you will grow merciful as you write.'
'No, that is not the way to let my indignation ooze out at my finger's ends. I shall begin
      by writing to condole with Markham. Poor man! what a state he must be in! all the more
      pitiable because he evidently had entirely forgotten that there could ever be a creature of
      the less worthy gender born to the house of Morville; so it will take him quite by surprise.
      What will he do, and how will he ever forgive Mrs. Ashford, who, I see in the paper, has a son
      whom nobody wants, as if for the express purpose of insulting Markham's feelings! Well-a-day!
      I should have liked to have had the sound of Sir Guy Morville still in my ears, and yet I
      don't know that I could have endured its being applied to a little senseless baby! And after
      all, we are the gainers; for it would have been a forlorn thing to have seen Amy go off to
      reign queen-mother at Redclyffe, —and most notably well would she have reigned, with that
      clear little head. I vow 'tis a talent thrown away! However, I can't grumble. She is much
      happier without greatness thrust on her, and, for my own part, I have my home-sister all to
      myself, with no rival but that small woman—and how she will pet her!'

'And how you will! What a spoiling uncle you will be! But now, having heard you reason
      yourself into philosophy, I'll leave you to write. We were so anxious that I could not help
      coming. I am so glad that little one thrives! I should like to leave my love for Amy, if
      you'll remember it.'
'The rarity of such a message from you may enable me. I was lying here alone, and received
      the collected love of five Harpers to convey upstairs, all which I forgot; though in its
      transit by Arnaud and his French, it had become 'that they made their friendships to my lady
      and Mrs. Edmonstone.''
Charles had not talked so like himself for months; and Mary felt that Amabel's child, if she
      had disappointed some expectations, had come like a spring blossom, to cheer Hollywell, after
      its long winter of sorrow and anxiety. She seemed to have already been received as a messenger
      to comfort them for the loss, greatest of all to her, poor child, though she would never know
      how great. Next Mary wondered what kind of letter Charles would indite, and guessed it would
      be all the kinder for the outpouring he had made to her, the only person with whom he ventured
      to indulge in a comfortable abuse of Philip, since his good sense taught him that, ending as
      affairs must it was the only wise way to make the best of it with father, mother, and
      Charlotte, all quite sufficiently disposed to regard Philip with aversion without his
      help.
Philip was at breakfast with the Henleys, on the following morning, a Sunday,—or rather,
      sitting at the breakfast-table when the letters were brought in. Mrs. Henley, pretending to be
      occupied with her own, had an eager, watchful eye on her brother, as one was placed before
      him. She knew Mr. Edmonstone's writing, but was restrained from exclaiming by her involuntary
      deference for her brother. He flushed deep red one moment, then turned deadly pale; his hand,
      when first he raised it, trembled, but then became
       firm, as if controlled by the force of his resolution. He broke the black seal,
      drew out the letter, paused another instant, unfolded it, glanced at it, pushed his chair from
      the table, and hastened to the door.
'Tell me, tell me, Philip, what is it?' she exclaimed, rising to follow him.
He turned round, threw the letter on the table, and with a sign that forbade her to come
      with him, left the room.
'Poor fellow! how he feels it! That poor young creature!' said she, catching up the letter
      for explanation.
'Ha! No! Listen to this, Dr. Henley. Why, he must have read it wrong!'
Hollywell, March 5th.
'Dear Philip ,—I have to announce to you that Lady Morville was safely confined
      this morning with a daughter. I shall be ready to send all the papers and accounts of the
      Redclyffe estate to any place you may appoint as soon as she is sufficiently recovered to
      transact business. Both she and the infant are as well as can be expected.—Yours
      sincerely,
'C. Edmonstone. '
'A daughter!' cried Dr. Henley. 'Well, my dear, I congratulate you! It is as fine a property
      as any in the kingdom. We shall see him pick up strength now.'
'I must go and find him. He surely has mistaken!' said Margaret, hastening in search of him;
      but he was not to be found, and she saw him no more till she found him in the seat at
      church.
She hardly waited to be in the churchyard, after the service, before she said, 'Surely you
      mistook the letter!'
'No, I did not.'
'You saw that she is doing well, and it is a girl.'
'I—'
'And will you not let me congratulate you?'
She was interrupted by some acquaintance; but when
       she looked round he was nowhere to be seen, and she was obliged to be content
      with telling every one the news. One or two of her many tame gentlemen came home with her to
      luncheon, and she had the satisfaction of dilating on the grandeur of Redclyffe. Her brother
      was not in the drawing-room, but answered when she knocked at his door.
'Luncheon is ready. Will you come down?'
'Is any one there?'
'Mr. Brown and Walter Maitland. Shall I send you anything, or do you like to come down?'
'I'll come, thank you,' said he, thus secured from a lête-à-tête.
'Had you better come? Is not your head too bad!'
'It will not be better for staying here; I'll come.'
She went down, telling her visitors that, since his illness, her brother always suffered so
      much from excitement that he was too unwell to have derived much pleasure from the tidings:
      and when he appeared, his air corresponded with her account, for his looks were of the gravest
      and sternest. He received the congratulations of the gentlemen without the shadow of a smile,
      and made them think him the haughtiest and most dignified landed proprietor in England.
Mrs. Henley advised strongly against his going to church; but without effect, and losing him
      in the crowd coming out, saw him no more till just before dinner-time. He had steeled himself
      to endure all that she and the doctor could inflict on him that evening, and he had a hope of
      persuading Amabel that it would be only doing justice to her child to let him restore her
      father's inheritance, which had come to him through circumstances that could not have been
      foreseen. He was determined to do nothing like an act of possession of Redclyffe till he had
      implored her to accept the offer; and it was a great relief thus to keep it in doubt a little
      longer, and not absolutely feel himself profiting by Guy's death and sitting in his seat. Not
      a word, however, must be
       said to let his sister guess at his resolution, and he must let her torture him
      in the mean time. He was vexed at having been startled into betraying his suffering, and was
      humiliated at the thought of the change from that iron imperturbability, compounded of
      strength, pride, and coldness, in which he had once gloried.
Dr. Henley met him with a shake of the hand, and hearty exclamation:—
'I congratulate you, Sir Philip Morville.'
'No; that is spared me,' was his answer.
'Hm? The baronetcy?'
'Yes,' said Margaret, 'I thought you knew that only goes to the direct heir of old Sir Hugh.
      But you must drop the 'captain' at least. You will sell out at once?'
He patiently endured the conversation on the extent and beauty of Redclyffe, wearing, all
      the time, a stern, resolute aspect, that his sister knew to betoken great unhappiness. She
      earnestly wished to understand him; but at last seeing how much her conversation increased his
      headach, she desisted, and left him to all the repose his thoughts could give him. He was very
      much concerned at the tone of the note from his uncle, as if it was intended to show that all
      connexion with the family was to be broken off. He supposed it had been concerted with some
      one; with Charles, most likely,—Charles, who had judged him too truly, and with his attachment
      to Guy, and aversion to himself, was doubtless strengthening his father's displeasure, all the
      more for this hateful wealth. And Laura? What did she feel?
Monday morning brought another letter. At first, he was struck with the dread of evil
      tidings of Amabel or her babe, especially when he recognised Charles's straggling handwriting;
      and, resolved not to be again betrayed, he carried it up to read in his own room before his
      sister had noticed it. He could hardly resolve to open it, for surely Charles would not write
      to him without necessity; and what, save sorrow, could cause that necessity? He saw that his
      wretchedness might
       be even more complete! At length he read it, and could hardly believe his own
      eyes as he saw cheering words, in a friendly style of interest and kindliness such as he would
      never have expected from Charles, more especially now.
Hollywell, March 6th.
'My dear Philip ,—I believe my father wrote to you in haste yesterday; but I am
      sure you will be anxious for further accounts, and when there is good news there is
      satisfaction in conveying it. I know you will be glad to hear our affairs are very prosperous;
      and Amy, whom I have just been visiting, is said by the authorities to be going on as well as
      possible. She begs me to tell you of her welfare, and to assure you that she is particularly
      pleased to have a daughter; or, perhaps, it will be more satisfactory to have her own words.
      'You must tell him how well I am, Charlie, and how very glad. And tell him that he must not
      vex himself about her being a girl, for that is my great pleasure; and I do believe, the very
      thing I should have chosen if I had set to work to wish.' You know Amy never said a word but
      in all sincerity, so you may trust her; and I add my testimony that she is in placid spirits,
      and may well be glad to escape the cares of Redclyffe. My father says he desired Markham to
      write to you on the business matters. I hope the seabreezes may do you good. All the party
      here are well; but I see little of them now, all the interest of the house is upstairs.—Your
      affectionate,
'C. M. Edmonstone.
'P.S. The baby is very small, but so plump and healthy, that no one attempts to be uneasy
      about her.'
Never did letter come in better time to raise a desponding heart. Of Amabel's forgiveness he
      was already certain; but that she should have made Charles his friend was a wonder beyond all
      others. It gave him more hope for the future than he had yet been able to entertain, and
      showed him that the former note was
       no studied renunciation of him, but only an ebullition of Mr. Edmonstone's
      disappointment.
It gave him spirit enough to undertake what he had long been meditating, but without energy
      to set about it—an expedition to Stylehurst. Hitherto it had been his first walk on coming to
      St. Mildred's, but now the distance across the moor was far beyond his powers; and even that
      length of ride was a great enterprise. It was much further by the carriage road, and his
      sister never liked going there. He had never failed to visit his old home till last year, and
      he felt almost glad that he had not carried his thoughts, at that time, to his father's grave.
      It was strange that, with so many more important burdens on his mind, it had been this
      apparently trivial omission, this slight to Stylehurst, that, in both his illnesses, had been
      the most frequently recurring idea that had tormented him in his delirium. So deeply, securely
      fixed is the love of the home of childhood in men of his mould, in whom it is perhaps the most
      deeply-rooted of all affections.
Without telling his sister his intention, he hired a horse, and pursued the familiar
      moorland tracks. He passed South Moor Farm; it gave him too great a pang to look at it; he
      rode on across the hills where he used to walk with his sisters, and looked down into narrow
      valleys where he had often wandered with his fishing-rod, lost in musings on plans for
      attaining distinction, and seeing himself the greatest man of his day. Little had he then
      guessed the misery which would place him in the way to the coveted elevation, or how he would
      loathe it when it lay within his grasp.
There were the trees round the vicarage, the church spire, the cottages, whose old rough
      aspect he knew so well, the whole scene once 'redolent of joy and youth;' but how unable to
      breathe on him a second spring! He put up his horse at the village inn, and went to make his
      first call on Susan, the old clerk's wife, and one of the persons in all the world who loved
      him best.

He knocked, opened the door, and saw her, startled from her tea-drinking, looking at him as
      a stranger.
'Bless us! It beant never Master Philip!' she exclaimed, her head shaking very fast, as she
      recognised his voice. 'Why, sir, what a turn you give me! How bad you be looking, to be
      sure!'
He sat down and talked with her, with feelings of comfort. Tidings of Sir Guy's death had
      reached the old woman, and she was much grieved for the nice, cheerful-spoken young gentleman,
      whom she well remembered; for she, like almost every one who had ever had any intercourse with
      him, had an impression left of him as of something winning, engaging, brightening, like a
      sunbeam. It was a refreshment to meet with one who would lament him for his own sake, and had
      no congratulations for Philip himself; and the 'Sure, sure, it must have been very bad for
      you,' with which old Susan heard of the circumstances, carried more of the comfort of genuine
      sympathy than all his sister's attempts at condolence.
She told him how often Sir Guy had been at Stylehurst, how he had talked to her about the
      archdeacon; and especially she remembered his helping her husband one day when he found him
      trimming the ash over the archdeacon's grave. He used to come very often to church there, more
      in the latter part of his stay; there was one Sunday—it was the one before Michaelmas— he was
      there all day, walking in the churchyard, and sitting in the porch between services.
'The Sunday before Michaelmas!' thought Philip, the very time when he had been most earnest
      in driving his uncle to persecute, and delighting himself in having triumphed over Guy at
      last, and obtained tangible demonstration of his own foresight, and his cousin's vindictive
      spirit. What had he been throwing away? Where had, in truth, been the hostile spirit?
He took the key of the church, and walked thither alone, standing for several minutes by the
      three graves, with a sensation as if his father was demanding of him
       an account of the boy he had watched, and brought to his ancestral home, and
      cared for through his orphaned childhood. But for the prayer-book, the pledge that there had
      been peace at the last, how could he have borne it?
Here was the paved path he had trodden in early childhood, holding his mother's hand, where,
      at each recurring vacation during his school days, he had walked between his admiring sisters,
      in the consciousness that he was the pride of his family and of all the parish. Of his family?
      Did he not remember his return home for the last time before that when he was summoned thither
      by his father's death? He had come with a whole freight of prizes, and letters full of
      praises; and as he stood, in expectation of the expression of delighted satisfaction, his
      father laid his hand on his trophy, the pile of books, saying, gravely—'All this would I give,
      Philip, for one evidence of humility of mind.'
It had been his father's one reproof. He had thought it unjust and unreasonable, and turned
      away impatiently to be caressed and admired by Margaret. His real feelings had been told to
      her, because she flattered them and shared them; he had been reserved and guarded with the
      father who would have perceived and repressed that ambition and the self-sufficiency which he
      himself had never known to exist, nor regarded as aught but sober truth. It had been his bane,
      that he had been always too sensible to betray outwardly his self-conceit, in any form that
      could lead to its being noticed.
He opened the church door, closed it behind him, and locked himself in.
He came up to the communion rail, where he had knelt for the first time twelve years ago,
      confident in himself, and unconscious of the fears with which his father's voice was trembling
      in the intensity of his prayer for one in whom there was no tangible evil, and whom others
      thought a pattern of all that could be desired by the fondest hopes.

He knelt down, with bowed head, and hands clasped. Assuredly, if his father could have
      beheld him then, it would have been with rejoicing. He would not have sorrowed that that
      robust frame was wasted, and great strength brought low; that the noble features were worn,
      the healthful cheek pale, and the powerful intellect clouded and weakened; he would hardly
      have mourned for the cruel grief and suffering, such would have been his joy that the humble,
      penitent, obedient heart had been won at last. Above all, he would have rejoiced that the
      words that most soothed that wounded spirit were,—'A broken and contrite heart, O God, Thou
      wilt not despise.'
There was solace in that solemn silence; the throbs of head and heart were stilled in the
      calm around. It was as if the influences of the prayers breathed for him by his father, and
      the forgiveness and loving spirit there won by Guy, had been waiting for him there till he
      came to take them up, for thenceforth the bitterest of his despair was over, and he could
      receive each token of Amabel's forgiveness, not as heaped coals of fire, but as an earnest of
      forgiveness sealed in heaven.
The worst was over, and though he still had much to suffer, he was becoming open to receive
      comfort; the blank dark remorse in which he had been living began to lighten, and the tone of
      his mind to return.
He spoke more cheerfully to Susan when he restored the key; but she had been so shocked at
      his appearance, that when, the next day, a report reached her that Mr. Philip was now a grand
      gentleman, and very rich, she answered,—
'Well, if it be so, I am glad of it, but he said never a word of it to me, and it is my
      belief he would give all the money as ever was coined, to have the poor young gentleman back
      again. Depend upon it, he hates the very sound of it.'
At the cost of several sheets of paper, Philip at length completed a letter to Mr.
      Edmonstone, which, when he had sent it, made his suspense more painful.

'St. Mildred's, March 12th.
'My Dear Mr. Edmonstone ,—It is with a full sense of the unfitness of intruding
      such a subject upon you in the present state of the family, that I again address you on the
      same topic as that on which I wrote to you from Italy, at the first moment at which I have
      felt it possible to ask your attention. I was then too ill to be able to express my contrition
      for all that has passed; in fact, I doubt whether it was even then so deep as at present,
      since every succeeding week has but added to my sense of the impropriety of my conduct, and my
      earnest desire for pardon. I can hardly venture at such a time to ask anything further, but I
      must add that my sentiments towards your daughter are unaltered, and can never cease but with
      my life; and though I know I have rendered myself unworthy of her, and my health, both mental
      and bodily, is far from being re-established, I cannot help laying my feelings before you, and
      entreating that you will put an end to the suspense which has endured for so many months, by
      telling me to hope that I have not for ever forfeited your consent to my attachment. At least,
      I trust to your kindness for telling me on what terms I am for the present to stand with your
      family. I am glad to hear such favourable reports of Lady Morville, and with all my heart I
      thank Charles for his letter.
'Yours ever affectionately,
'Ph. Morville .'
He ardently watched for a reply. He could not endure the idea of receiving it where
      Margaret's eyes could scan the emotion he could now only conceal by a visible rigidity of
      demeanour, and he daily went himself to the post-office, but in vain. He received nothing but
      business letters, and among them one from Markham, with as much defiance and dislike in its
      style as could be shown in a perfectly formal, proper letter. Till he had referred to Lady
      Morville, he would not make any demonstration towards Redclyffe, and evaded
       all his sister's questions as to what he was doing about it, and when he should
      take measures for leaving the army, or obtaining a renewal of the baronetcy.
Anxiety made him look daily more wretchedly haggard; the doctor was at fault, Mrs. Henley
      looked sagacious, while his manner became so dry and repellent that visitors went away
      moralizing on the absurdity of nuvoeaux riches taking so much state on them.
He wondered how soon he might venture to write to Amabel, on whom alone he could depend; but
      he felt it a sort of profanity to disturb her.
He had nearly given up his visits to the post in despair, when one morning he beheld what
      never failed to bring some soothing influence, namely, the fair pointed characters he had not
      dared to hope for.
He walked quickly into the promenade, sat down, and read:—
'Hollywell, March 22nd.
'My dear Philip ,—Papa does not answer your letter, because he says speaking is
      better than writing, and we hope you are well enough to come to us before Sunday week. I hope
      to take our dear little girl to be christened on that day, and I want you to be so kind as to
      be her godfather. I ask it of you, not only in my own name, but in her father's, for I am sure
      it is what he would choose. Her aunt Laura and Mary Ross are to be her godmothers. I hope you
      will not think me very foolish and fanciful for naming her Mary Verena, in remembrance of our
      old readings of Sintram. She is a very healthy, quiet creature, and I am getting on very well.
      I am writing from the dressing-room, and I expect to be down stairs in a few days. If you do
      not dislike it very much, could you be so kind as to call upon Miss Wellwood, and pay little
      Marianne Dixon's quarter for me? It is £10, and it will save trouble if you would do it;
      besides that, I should like to hear of her and the little girl. I am sorry to hear you are not
      better,—perhaps coming here
       may do you good.—Four o'clock. I have been keeping my letter in hopes of
      persuading papa to put in a note, but he says he had rather send a message that 'he is quite
      ready to forgive and forget, and it will be best to talk it over when you come.'
'Your affectionate cousin,
'A. F. Morville .'
It was well he was not under his sister's eye, for he could not read this letter calmly, and
      he was obliged to take several turns along the walk before he could recover his composure
      enough to appear in the breakfast-room, where he found his sister alone, dealing her letters
      into separate packets of important and unimportant.
'Good morning, Philip. Dr. Henley is obliged to go to Bramshaw this morning, and has had an
      early breakfast. Have you been out?'
'Yes, it is very fine—I mean it will be—the haze is clearing.'
Margaret saw that he was unusually agitated, and not by grief; applied herself to
      tea-making, and hoped his walk had given him an appetite; but there seemed little chance of
      this, so long were his pauses between each morsel, and so often did he lean back in his
      chair.
'I am going to leave you on—on Friday,' he said, at length, abruptly.
'Oh, are you going to Redclyffe?'
'No; to Hollywell. Lady Morville wishes me to be her little girl's sponsor; I shall go to
      London on Friday, and on, the next day.'
'I am glad they have asked you. Does she write herself? Is she pretty well?'
'Yes; she is to go downstairs in a day or two.'
'I am rejoiced that she is recovering so well. Do you know whether she is in tolerable
      spirits?'
'She writes cheerfully.'
'How many years is it since I saw her? She was quite a child; but very sweet-tempered and
      attentive
       to poor Charles,' said Mrs. Henley, feeling most amiably disposed towards her
      future sister-in-law.
'Just so. Her gentleness and sweet temper were always beautiful; and she has shown herself
      under her trials what it would be presumptuous to praise.'
Margaret had no doubt now, and thought he was ready for more open sympathy.
'You must let me congratulate you now on this unexpected dawn of hope, after your long
      trial, my dear brother. It is a sort of unconscious encouragement you could hardly hope
      for.'
'I did not know you knew anything of it,' said Philip.
'Ah! my dear brother, you betrayed yourself. You need not be disconcerted; only a sister
      could see the real cause of your want of spirits. Your manner at each mention of her, your
      anxiety, coupled with your resolute avoidance of her—'
'Of whom? Do you know what you are talking of, sister?' said Philip, sternly.
'Of Amabel, of course.'
Philip rose, perfectly awful in his height and indignation.
'Sister!' he said—paused, and began again. 'I have been attached to Laura Edmonstone for
      years past, and Lady Morville knows it.'
'To Laura!' cried Mrs. Henley, in amaze. 'Are you engaged?' and as he was hardly prepared to
      answer, she continued, 'If you have not gone too far to recede, only consider before you take
      any rash step. You come into this property without ready money, you will find endless claims,
      and if you marry at once and without fortune, you will never be clear from difficulties.'
'I have considered,' he replied, with cold loftiness that would have silenced any one, not
      of the same determined mould.
'You are positively committed, then!' she said, much vexed. 'Oh, Philip! I did not think you
      would have married for mere beauty.'

'I can hear no more discussion on this point,' answered Philip, in the serious, calm tone
      that showed so much power over himself and every one else.
It put Margaret to silence, though she was excessively disappointed to find him thus
      involved just at his outset, when he might have married so much more advantageously. She was
      sorry, too, that she had shown her opinion so plainly, since it was to be, and hurt his
      feelings just as he seemed to be thawing. She would fain have learnt more; but he was
      completely shut up within himself, and never opened again to her. She had never before so
      grated on every delicate feeling in his mind; and he only remained at her house because, in
      his present state of health, he hardly knew where to bestow himself till it was time for him
      to go to Hollywell.
He went to call on Miss Wellwood, to whom his name was no slight recommendation, and she met
      him eagerly, asking after Lady Morville, who, she said, had twice written to her most kindly
      about little Marianne.
It was a very pleasant visit, and a great relief. He looked at the plans, heard the fresh
      arrangements, admired, was interested, and took pleasure in having something to tell Amabel.
      He asked for Marianne, and heard that she was one of the best of children —amiable,
      well-disposed, only almost too sensitive. Miss Wellwood said it was remarkable how deep an
      impression Sir Guy had made upon her, and how affectionately she remembered his kindness; and
      her distress at hearing of his death had been far beyond what such a child could have been
      supposed to feel, both in violence and in duration.
Philip asked to see her, knowing it would please Amabel, and in she came—a long, thin,
      nine-year old child, just grown into the encumbering shyness, that is by no means one of the
      graces of la vieillesse de lenfance.
He wished to be kind and encouraging; but melancholy, added to his natural stateliness, made
      him very
       formidable; and poor Marianne was capable of nothing beyond 'yes' or 'no.'
He told her he was going to see Lady Morville and her little girl, whereat she eagerly
      raised her eyes, then shrank in affright at anything so tall, and so unlike Sir Guy. He said
      the baby was to be christened next Sunday, and Miss Wellwood helped him out by asking the
      name.
Mary, he said, for he was by no means inclined to explain the Verena, though he knew not
      half what it conveyed to Amabel.
Lastly, he asked if Marianne had any message; when she hung down her head, and whispered to
      Miss Wellwood, what proved to be 'My love to dear little cousin Mary.'
He promised to deliver it, and departed, wishing he could more easily unbend.

</div></body></text></TEI>