<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Heir of Redclyffe</title><author>Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary
     History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1853</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">
CHAPTER V.

I forgave thee all the blame,
I could not forgive the praise.
Tennyson. 
If ever there was a meddlesome coxcomb on this earth!'
Such was the exclamation that greeted the ears of Guy as he supported Charles into the
      breakfast-room; and, at the same time, Mr. Edmonstone tossed a letter into Guy's plate,
      saying,—'There's something for you to read.'
Guy began; his lips were tightly pressed together; his brows made one black line across his
      forehead, and his eye sparkled, even through his bent down eyelashes; but this lasted only a
      few moments; the forehead smoothed again, and there was a kind of deliberate restraint and
      force upon himself, which had so much power that no one spoke till he had finished, folded it
      up with a sort of extra care, and returned it, only saying,—'You should not show one such
      letters, Mr. Edmonstone.'
'Does not it beat everything?' cried Mr. Edmonstone. 'If that is not impertinence, I should
      like to know what is! But he has played my Lord Paramount rather too long, as I can tell him!
      I ask his consent, forsooth! Probation, indeed! You might marry her to-morrow, and welcome.
      There, give it to mamma. See if she does not say the same. Mere spite and malice all
      along.'

Poor Laura! would no one refute such cruel injustice? Yes; Guy spoke, eagerly,—'No, no; that
      it never was. He was quite right under his belief.'
'Don't tell me! Not a word in his favour will I hear!' stormed on Mr. Edmonstone. 'Mere envy
      and ill will.'
'I always told him so,' said Charles. 'Pure malignity!'
'Nonsense, Charlie!' said Guy, sharply; 'there is no such thing about him.'
'Come, Guy, I can't stand this,' said Mr. Edmonstone. 'I wont have him defended; I never
      thought to be so deceived; but you all worshipped the boy as if every word that came out of
      his mouth was Gospel truth, and you've set him up till he would not condescend to take an
      advice of his own father, who little thought what an upstart sprig he was rearing; but I tell
      him he has come to the wrong shop for domineering —eh, mamma?'
'Well!' cried Mrs. Edmonstone, who had read till near the end with tolerable equanimity;
      'this really is too bad!'
Mamma and all! thought poor Laura, while her mother continued,—'It is wilful prejudice, to
      say the least,—I never could have believed him capable of it!'
Charles next had the letter, and was commenting on it in a style of mingled sarcasm and
      fury, while Laura longed to see it justify itself, as she was sure it would.
'Read it, all of you—every bit,' said Mr. Edmonstone, 'that you may see this paragon of
      yours!'
'I had rather not,' said Amy, shrinking as it came towards her.
'I should like you to do so, if you don't dislike it very much,' said Guy.
She read in silence; and then came the turn of Laura, who marvelled at the general injustice
      as she read.

Cork , April 8th.
My dear Uncle ,—I am much obliged to you for the communication of your intention
      with regard to Amabel, but, indeed, I must say I am a good deal surprised that you should have
      so hastily resolved on so important a step, and have been satisfied with so incomplete an
      explanation of circumstances which appeared to you, as well as to myself, to show that Guy's
      character was yet quite unsettled, and his conduct such as to create considerable apprehension
      that he was habitually extremely imprudent, to say the least of it, in the management of his
      own affairs. How much more unfit, therefore, to have the happiness of another intrusted to
      him? I believe, indeed, I understood you to have declared to me that you were resolved never
      to allow the engagement to be renewed, unless he should, with the deference which is only due
      to you as his guardian, consent to clear up the mystery with which he has thought fit to
      invest all his pecuniary transactions; and this, it appears, he refuses, as he persists in
      denying all explanation of his demand for that large sum of money. As to the cheque, which
      certainly was applied to discreditable uses, though I will not suffer myself to suppose that
      Guy was in collusion with his uncle, yet it is not at all improbable that Dixon, not being a
      very scrupulous person, may, on hearing of the difficulties in which his nephew has been
      placed, come forward to relieve him from his embarrassment, in the hope of further profit, by
      thus establishing a claim on his gratitude. In fact, this proof of secretly renewed
      intercourse with Dixon rather tends to increase the presumption that there is something wrong.
      I am not writing this in the expectation that the connexion should be entirely broken off, for
      that, indeed, would be out of the question as things stand at present, but for my little
      cousin's sake, as well as his own, I entreat of you to pause. They are both extremely young,
      so young, that if there was no other ground, many persons would think it advisable to wait a
      few years; and why
       not wait until the time fixed by his grandfather for his coming into possession
      of his property? If the character of his attachment to Amabel is firm and true, the probation
      may be of infinite service to him, as keeping before him, during the most critical period of
      his life, a powerful motive for restraining the natural impetuosity of his disposition; while,
      on the other hand, if this should prove to have been a mere passing fancy for the first young
      lady into whose society he has been thrown on terms of easy familiar intercourse, you will
      then have the satisfaction of reflecting that your care and caution have preserved your
      daughter from a life of misery. My opinion has never altered respecting him, that he is brave
      and generous, with good feelings and impulses, manners peculiarly attractive, and altogether a
      character calculated to inspire affection, but impetuous and unsteady, easily led into
      temptation, yet obstinate in reserve, and his temper of unchecked violence. I wish him
      happiness of every kind; and, as you well know, would do my utmost for his welfare; but my
      affection for your whole family, and my own conscientious conviction, make me feel it my duty
      to offer this remonstrance, which I hope will be regarded as by no means the result of any ill
      will, but simply of a sincere desire for the good of all parties, such as can only be evinced
      by plain speaking.—Yours affectionately,
P. Morville.
All the time Laura was reading, Guy was defending Philip against the exaggerated abuse that
      Mr. Edmonstone and Charles were pouring out, till at last Mrs. Edmonstone, getting out of
      patience, said,—'My dear Guy, if we did not know you so well, we should almost accuse you of
      affectation.'
'Then I shall go away,' said Guy, laughing, as he rose. 'Can you come out with me?' said he,
      in a lower tone, leaning over the back of Amy's chair.
'No; wait a bit,' interposed Mr. Edmonstone; don't take her out, or you wont be to be found
      anywhere,
       and I want to speak to you before I write my letter, and go to the Union Meeting.
      I want to tell Master Philip, on the spot, that the day is fixed, and we snap our fingers at
      him and his probation. Wait till twentyfive! I daresay!'
At 'I want to speak to you,' the ladies had made the first move towards departure, but they
      were not out of hearing at the conclusion. Guy looked after Amy, but she would not look round,
      and Charles lay twisting Bustle's curls round his fingers, and smiling to himself at the
      manner in which the letter was working by contraries. The overthrow of Philip's influence was
      a great triumph for him, apart from the way in which it affected his friend and his
      sister.
Mr. Edmonstone was disappointed that Guy would not set about fixing the day, in time for him
      to announce it in a letter to be written in the course of an hour. Guy said, he had not begun
      on the subject with Amy, and it would never do to hurry her. Indeed, it was a new light to
      himself that Mr. Edmonstone would like it to take place so soon.
'Pray when did you think it was to be?' said Mr. Edmonstone. 'Upon my word, I never in all
      my days saw a lover like you, Guy!'
'I was too happy to think about the future; besides, I did not know whether you had
      sufficient confidence in me.'
'Confidence, nonsense! I tell you, if I had a dozen daughters I would trust them all to
      you.'
Guy smiled, and was infected by Charles's burst of laughing, but Mr. Edmonstone went on
      unheeding— 'I have the most absolute confidence in you! I am going to write to Philip this
      minute, to tell him he has played three-tailed Bashaw rather too long. I shall tell him it is
      to be very soon, at any rate, and that if he wishes to see how I value his pragmatical advice,
      he may come and dance at the wedding. I declare, your mamma and that colonel of his have
      perfectly spoilt him with their flattery! I knew what would
       come of it; you all would make a prodigy of him, till he's so puffed up that he
      entirely forgets who he is!'
'Not I,' said Charles; 'that can't be laid to my door.'
'But I'll write him such a letter this instant as shall make him remember what he is, and
      show him who he has to deal with. Eh, Charlie?'
'Don't you think,' said Guy, preparing to go, 'that it might be better to wait a day or two,
      till we see our way clearer, and are a little cooler?'
'I tell you, Guy, there is no one that puts me out of patience now, but yourself. You are as
      bad as Philip himself. Cool? I am coolness itself, all but what's proper spirit for a man to
      show when his family is affronted and himself dictated to by a meddling young Jackanapes. I'll
      serve him out properly!'
A message called him away. Guy stood looking perplexed and sorrowful.
'Never mind,' said Charles, 'I'll take care the letter is moderate. Besides, it is only
      Philip, and he knows that letter writing is not his forte.'
'I am afraid things will be said in irritation, which you will both regret. There are
      justice and reason in the letter.'
'There shall be more in the answer, as you will see.'
'No, I will not see. It is Mr. Edmonstone's concern, not mine. I am the last person who
      should have anything to do with it.'
'Just what the individual in question would not have said.'
'Would you do one thing to oblige me, Charlie?'
'Anything but not speaking my mind to, or of, the captain.'
'That is the very thing, unluckily. Try to get the answer put off till to-morrow, and that
      will give time to look at this letter candidly.'
'All the candour in the world will not make me think otherwise than that he is disappointed
      at being
       no longer able to make us the puppets of his malevolence. Don't answer, or if you
      do, tell me what you say in favour of that delicate insinuation of his.'
Guy made a step towards the window, and a step back again. ''Tis not fair to ask such
      questions,' he replied, after a moment. 'It is throwing oil on the fire. I was trying to
      forget it. He neither knows my uncle nor the circumstances.'
'Well, I am glad there is a point on which you can't even pretend to stand up for him, or I
      should have thought you crazed with Quixotism. But I am keeping you when you want to be off to
      Amy. Never mind Mr. Ready-to-halt; I shall wait till my father comes back. If you want the
      letter put off, you had better give some hopes of—Oh, he is gone; and disinterested advice it
      is of mine, for what is to become of me without Amy remains to be proved. Laura, poor thing,
      looks like Patience on a monument. I wonder whether Philip's disgrace has anything to do with
      it. Hum? If mamma's old idea was right, the captain has been more like moth and candle than
      consistent with his prudence, unless he thought it à toute épreuve . I wonder what
      came to pass last autumn, when I was ill, and mamma's head full of me. He may not intend it,
      and she may not know it, but I would by no means answer for Cupid's being guiltless of that
      harassed look she has had ever since that ball-going summer. Oh! there go that pretty study,
      Amy and her true knight. As to Guy, he is more incomprehensible than ever; yet there is no
      avoiding obeying him, on the principle on which that child in the 'Moorland cottage' said she
      should obey Don Quixote.'
So when his father came in, Charles wiled him into deferring the letter till the next day,
      by giving him an indistinct hope that some notion, when the marriage would be, might be
      arrived at by that time. He consented the more readily, because he was in haste to investigate
      a complaint that had just been made of the union doctor; but his last words to his wife and
      son
       before he went, were—'Of course, they must marry directly; there is nothing on
      earth to wait for. Live at Redclyffe alone? Not to be thought of. No; I'll see little Amy my
      Lady Morville, before Philip goes abroad, if only to show him I am not a man to be dictated
      to.'
Mrs. Edmonstone sighed; but when he was gone, she agreed with Charles that there was nothing
      to wait for, and that it would be better for Guy to take his wife at once with him, when he
      settled at Redclyffe. So it must be whenever Amy could make up her mind to it; and thereupon
      they made plans for future meetings, Charles announcing that the Prince of the Black Isles
      would become locomotive, and Charlotte forming grand designs upon Shag Island.
In the meantime, Guy and Amy were walking in the path through the wood, where he began: 'I
      would not have asked you to do anything so unpleasant as reading that letter, but I thought
      you ought to consider of it.'
'It was just like himself! How could he?' said Amy, indignantly.
'I wonder whether he will ever see his own harshness?' said Guy. 'It is very strange, that
      with all his excellence and real kindness, there should be some distortion in his view of all
      that concerns me. I cannot understand it.'
'You must let me call it prejudice, Guy, in spite of your protest. It is a relief to say
      something against him.'
'Amy, don't be venomous!' said Guy, in a playful tone of reproach.
'Yes; but you know it is not me whom he has been abusing.'
'Well,' said Guy, musingly, 'I suppose it is right there should be this cloud, or it would
      be too bright for earth. It has been one of my chief wishes to have things straight with
      Philip, ever since the time he stayed at Redclyffe, as a boy. I saw his superiority then; but
      it fretted me, and I never could make a companion of
       him. Ever since, I have looked to his approval as one of the best things to be
      won. It shows his ascendency of character; yet, do what I will, the mist has gone on
      thickening between us; and with reason, for I have never been able to give him the confidence
      he required, and his conduct about my uncle has so tried my patience, that I never have been
      quite sure whether I ought to avoid him or not.'
'And now you are the only person who will speak for him. I don't wonder papa is provoked
      with you,' said she, pretending to be wilful. 'I only hope you don't want to make me do the
      same. I could bear anything better than his old saying about your attractive manners and good
      impulses, and his opinion that has never altered. O Guy, he is the most provoking person in
      all the world. Don't try to make me admire him, nor be sorry for him.'
'Not when you remember how he was looked on here? and how, without doing anything worthy of
      blame, nay, from his acting unsparingly, as he thought right, every one has turned against
      him? even mamma, who used to be so fond of him.'
'Not Laura.'
'No, not Laura, and I am thankful to her for it; for all this makes me feel as if I had
      supplanted him.'
'Yes, yes, yes, it is like you; but don't ask me to feel that yet,' said Amy, with tears in
      her eyes, 'or I shall be obliged to tell you what you wont like to hear, about his tone of
      triumph that terrible time last year. It was so very different, I don't think I could ever
      forgive him, if it had not made me so miserable too.'
Guy pressed her arm. 'Yes; but he thought himself right. He meant to do the kindest thing by
      you,' said he, so entirely without effort, that no one could doubt it came straight from his
      heart. 'So he thinks still, Amy; there is fairness, justice, good sense in his letter, and we
      must not blind our eyes to it, though there is injustice, at least, harshness. I did fail
      egregiously in my first trial.'

'Fail!'
'In temper.'
'Oh!'
'And, Amy, I wanted to ask what you think about the four years he speaks of. Do you think,
      as he says, my habits might be more fixed, and altogether you might have more confidence?'
'I don't look on you quite as he does now,' said Amy, with a very pretty smile. 'Do you
      think his opinion of you will ever alter?'
'But what do you think? Is there not some reason in what he says?'
'The only use I can see is, that perhaps I should be wiser at twenty-four, and fitter to
      take care of such a great house; but then you have been always helping me to grow wiser, and I
      am not much afraid but that you will be patient with me. Indeed, Guy, I don't know whether it
      is a thing I ought to say,' she added, blushing, 'but I think it would be dismal for you to go
      and live all alone at Redclyffe.'
'Honestly, Amy,' replied he, after a little pause, 'if you feel so, and your father
      approves, I don't think it will be better to wait. I know your presence is a safe-guard, and
      if the right motives did not suffice to keep me straight, and I was only apparently so from
      hopes of you, why then I should be so utterly good for nothing at the bottom, if not on the
      surface, that you had better have nothing to say to me.'
Amy laughed incredulously.
'That being settled,' proceeded Guy, 'did you hear what your father said as you left the
      breakfast-room?'
She coloured all over, and there was silence. 'What did you answer?' said she, at
      length.
'I said, whatever happened, you must not be taken by surprise in having to decide quickly.
      Do you wish to have time to think? I'll go in and leave you to consider, if you like.'
'I only want to know what you wish,' said Amy, not parting with his arm.

'I had rather you did just as suits you best. Of course, you know what my wish must be.'
Amy walked on a little way in silence. 'Very well,' said she, presently, 'I think you and
      mamma had better settle it. The worst'—she had tears in her eyes—'the going
      away—Mamma—Charlie—all that will be as bad at one time as at another.' The tears flowed
      faster. 'It had better be as you all like best.'
'O Amy! I wonder at myself for daring to ask you to exchange your bright cheerful home for
      my gloomy old house.'
'No, your home,' said Amy, softly.
'I used to wonder why it was called gloomy; but it will be so no more when you are there.
      Yet there is a shadow hanging over it, which makes it sometimes seem too strange that you and
      it should be brought together.'
'I have read somewhere that there is no real gloom but what people raise for
      themselves.'
'True. Gloom is in sin, not sorrow. Yes, there would be no comfort if I were not sure that
      if aught of grief or pain should come to you through me, it will not, cannot really hurt you,
      my Amy.'
'No, unless by my own fault, and you will help me to meet it. Hark! was that a
      nightingale?'
'Yes, the first! How beautiful! There—don't you see it? Look on that hazel, you may see its
      throat moving. Well!' when they had listened for a long time,—'after all, that creature and
      the sea will hardly let one speak of gloom, even in this world, to say nothing of other
      things.'
'The sea! I am glad I have never seen it, because now you will show it to me for the first
      time.'
'You will never, can never imagine it, Amy!' and he sung,— 'With all tones of waters
      blending,    Glorious is the breaking deep, Glorious, beauteous, without ending,    Songs of
      ocean never sleep.' 

A silence followed, only broken by the notes of the birds, and presently by the strokes of
      the great clock. Guy looked at his watch.
'Eleven, Amy! I must go to my reading, or you will have to be very much ashamed of me.'
For, after the first few days, Guy had returned to study regularly every day. He said it was
      a matter of necessity, not at all of merit, for though he did not mean to try for honours, Amy
      must not marry a plucked man. His whole career at Oxford had been such a struggle with the
      disadvantages of his education, that all his diligence had, he thought, hardly raised him to a
      level with his contemporaries. Moreover, courtship was not the best preparation for the
      schools, so that, though he knew he had done his best, he expected no more than to pass
      respectably, and told Amy it was very good of her to be contented with a dunce, whereat she
      laughed merrily. But she knew him too well to try to keep him lingering in the April sunshine,
      and in they went, Guy to his Greek, and Amy to her mother. Charlotte's lessons had been in
      abeyance, or turned over to Laura of late, and Mrs. Edmonstone and her dressing-room were
      always ready for the confidences of the family, who sought her there in turn—all but one, and
      that the one whose need was the sorest.
Amy and her mother comforted themselves with a good quiet cry, that was not exactly
      sorrowful, and came to the conclusion that Guy was the most considerate person in the world,
      and they would do whatever best suited him and papa. So, when Mr. Edmonstone came home, he was
      rewarded for putting off the letter by finding every one willing to let the marriage take
      place whenever he pleased. There were various conferences in the dressing-room, and Guy and
      Amy both had burning faces when they came down to dinner. Laura beheld them with a throbbing
      heart, while she mechanically talked to Dr. Mayerne, as if nothing was going on. She was glad
      there was no singing that evening, for she felt incapable of joining; and when at
       night Charles and his father talked of sitting up to write to Philip, the misery
      was such that she had no relief till she had shut herself into her room, to bear or to crush
      the suffering as best she might.
She was still sitting helpless in her wretchedness when Amy knocked at the door, and came in
      glowing with blushes and smiles, though her eyelashes were dewy with tears.
'Laura, dearest! if you would not be so very unhappy! I wish I knew what to do for you.'
Laura laid her head on her shoulder, and cried. It was a great comfort, little as Amy could
      understand her trouble. Amy kissed her, soothed her caressingly, cried too, and said, in
      broken sentences, how often they would be together, and how comfortable it was that Charlie
      was so much better, and Charlotte quite a companion.
'Then you have fixed the day?' whispered Laura, at last.
'The Tuesday in Whitsunweek,' returned Amy, resting her forehead on Laura's shoulder. 'They
      all thought it right.'
Laura flung her arms round her, and wept too much to speak.
'Dear, dear Laura!' said Amy, after a time, 'it is very kind of you, but—'
'Oh, Amy! you don't know. You must not think so much better of me than I deserve. It is not
      only —No, I would not be so selfish, if, but—but—' Never had her self-command so given
      way.
'Ah! you are unhappy about Philip,' said Amy; and Laura, alarmed lest she might have
      betrayed him, started, and tried to recover herself; but she saw Amy was quite unsuspicious,
      and the relief from this fright helped her through what her sister was saying,—'Yes, you who
      were so fond of him, must be vexed at this unkindness on his part.'
'I am sure it is his real wish for your good,' murmured Laura.

'I daresay!' said Amy, with displeasure. Then changing her tone, 'I beg your pardon, dear
      Laura. but I don't think I can quite bear to hear any one but Guy defend him.'
'It is very generous.'
'Oh, is not it, Laura? and he says he is so grieved to see us turned against Philip, after
      being so fond of him; he says it makes him feel as if he had supplanted him, and that he is
      quite thankful to you for taking his part still.'
'How shall I bear it?' sighed Laura, to herself.
'I wonder whether he will come?' said Amy, thoughtfully.
'He will,' said Laura.
'You think so?' said Amy. 'Well, Guy would be glad. Yes. O Laura, if Philip would learn to
      do Guy justice, I don't think there would be any more to wish!'
'He will in time,' said Laura. 'He is too generous not to be won by such generosity as
      Guy's; and when all this is forgotten, and all these accusations have been lived down, he will
      be the warmest of friends.'
'Yes,' said Amy, as if she wished to be convinced; 'but if he would only leave off saying
      his opinion has never altered, I think I could bring myself to look on him as Guy wants me to
      do. Good night! dear Laura, and don't be unhappy. Oh! one thing I must tell you; Guy made
      Charles promise to do all he could not to let it be a hasty letter. Now, good night!'
Poor Laura, she knew not whether gratitude to Guy was not one of her most painful
      sensations. She wished much to know what had been said in the letter; but only one sentence
      transpired, and that was, that Mr. Edmonstone had never heard it was necessary to apply to a
      nephew for consent to a daughter's marriage. it seemed as if it must have been as cutting as
      Charles could make it; but Laura trusted to Philip's knowledge of the family, and desire for
      their good, to make him forgive it; and the expectation of seeing him again at
       the wedding, cheered her. Indeed, a hope of still greater consequences began to
      rise in her mind, after Charles one day said to her, 'I think you ought to be much obliged to
      Guy. This morning, he suddenly exclaimed, 'I say, Charlie, I wish you would take care Amy's
      fortune is not settled on her so that it can't be got rid of.' I asked how he meant to make
      ducks and drakes of it; and he explained, that if either of you two did not happen to marry
      for money, like Amy, it might do you no harm.'
'We are very much obliged to him,' said Laura, more earnestly than Charles had expected. 'Do
      you know what it is, Charlie?'
'Oh! you want to calculate the amount of your obligation! Somewhere about five thousand
      pounds, I believe.'
Charles watched Laura, and the former idea recurred, as he wondered whether there was any
      particular meaning in her inquiry.
Meaning, indeed, there was. Laura knew nothing about the value of money; she did not know
      what Philip had of his own; how far five, or even ten, thousand would go in enabling them to
      marry, or whether it was available in her father's life-time; but she thought this prospect
      might smooth the way to the avowal of their attachment, as effectually as his promotion; she
      reckoned on relief from the weary oppression of secrecy, and fully expected that it would all
      be told in the favourable juncture, when her parents were full of satisfaction in Amy's
      marriage. Gratitude to Guy would put an end to all doubt, dislike, and prejudice, and Philip
      would receive him as a brother.
These hopes supported Laura, and enabled her to take part with more appearance of interest
      in the consultations and arrangements for the marriage, which were carried on speedily, as the
      time was short, and Mr. Edmonstone's ideas were on a grand scale. It seemed as if he meant to
      invite all the world, and there were no limits to his views of breakfast, carriages, and
       splendours. His wife let him run out without contradiction, leaving the plans
      either to evaporate or condense, as time might prove best. Guy took Amy out walking, and asked
      what she thought of it.
'Do you dislike it very much?' she said.
'I can hardly tell. Of course, as a general rule, the less parade and nonsense the better;
      but if your father wishes it, and if people do find enjoyment in that way, it seems
      hard they should not have all they can out of it.'
'Oh, yes; the school children and poor people,' said Amy.
'How happy the Ashford children will be, feasting the poor people at Redclyffe! Old Jonas
      Ledbury will be in high glory.'
'To be sure, it does not seem like merit to feast one's poor neighbours rather than the
      rich. It is so much pleasanter.'
'However, since the poor will be feasted, I don't think the rich ones will do us much
      harm.'
'I am sure I shall know very little about them,' said Amy.
'The realities are so great to us, that they will swallow up the accessories. There must be
      the church, and all that; and for the rest, Amy, I don't think I shall find out whether you
      wear lace or grogram.'
There's encouragement for me!' said Amy, laughing. 'However, what I mean is, that I don't
      care about it, if I am not obliged to attend, and give my mind, to those kind of things just
      then, and that mamma will take care of.'
'Is it not a great trouble for her? I forgot that. It was selfish: for we slip out of the
      fuss, and it all falls on her.'
'Yes,' said Amy; 'but don't you think it would teaze her more to have to persuade papa out
      of what he likes, and alter every little matter. That would be worry, the rest only exertion;
      and, do you know, I think,' said she, with a rising tear, 'that it will be
       better for her, to keep her from thinking about losing me.'
'I see. Very well, we will take the finery quietly. Only one thing. Amy, we will not be put
      out of,—we will not miss the full holyday service.'
'Oh, yes; that will be the comfort.'
'One other thing, Amy. You know I have hardly a friend of my own; but there is one person I
      should like to ask,—Markham. He has been so kind, and so much attached to me; he loved my
      father so devotedly, and suffered so much at his death, that it is a pity he should not be
      made happy; and very happy he will be.'
'And there is one person I should like to ask, Guy, if mamma thinks we can do it. I am sure
      little Marianne ought to be one of my bridesmaids. Charlotte would take care of her, and it
      would be very nice to have her.'

</div></body></text></TEI>