<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Can You Forgive Her?</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1865</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="44">
CHAPTER XLIV. The Election for the Chelsea Districts.  
March came, and still the Chancellor of the Exchequer held his position. In the early days
      of March there was given in the House a certain parliamentary explanation on the subject,
      which, however, did not explain very much to any person. A statement was made which was
      declared by the persons making it to be altogether satisfactory, but nobody else seemed to
      find any satisfaction in it. The big wigs of the Cabinet had made an arrangement which, from
      the language used by them on this occasion, they must be supposed to have regarded as hardly
      less permanent than the stars; but everybody else protested that the Government was going to
      pieces; and Mr. Bott was heard to declare in clubs and lobbies, and wherever he could get a
      semi-public, political hearing, that this kind of thing wouldn't do. Lord Brock must either
      blow hot or cold. If he chose to lean upon Mr. Palliser, he might lean upon him, and Mr.
      Palliser would not be found wanting. In such case no opposition could touch Lord Brock or the
      Government. That was Mr. Bott's opinion. But if Lord Brock did not so choose, why, in that
      case, he must expect that Mr. Palliser, and Mr. Palliser's friends, would—. Mr. Bott
      did not say what they would do; but he was supposed by those who understood the matter to hint
      at an Opposition lobby, and adverse divisions, and to threaten Lord Brock with the open enmity
      of Mr. Palliser,—and of Mr. Palliser's great follower.
"This kind of thing won't do long, you know," repeated Mr. Bott for the second or third
      time, as he stood upon the rug before the fire at his club, with one or two of his young
      friends around him.
"I suppose not," said Calder Jones, the hunting Member of Parliament whom we once met at
      Roebury. "Planty Pall won't stand it, I should say."
"What can he do?" asked another, an unfledged Member who was not as yet quite settled as to
      the leadership under which he intended to work.
"What can he do?" said Mr. Bott, who on such an occasion as this could be very great,—who,
      for a moment, could almost feel that he might become a leader of a party for himself, and some
      day institute a Bott Ministry. "What can he do? You will very shortly see what he can do. He
      can make himself the master of the occasion. If Lord Brock doesn't look about him, he'll find
      that Mr. Palliser will be in the Cabinet without his help."
"You don't mean to say that the Queen will send for Planty Pall!" said the young Member.
"I mean to say that the Queen will send for any one that the House of Commons may direct her
      to call upon," said Mr. Bott, who conceived himself to have gauged the very depths of our
      glorious Constitution. "How hard it is to make any one understand that the Queen has really
      nothing to do with it!"
"Come, Bott, draw it mild," said Calder Jones, whose loyalty was shocked by the utter
      Manchesterialism of his political friend.
"Not if I know it," said Mr. Bott, with something of grandeur in his tone and countenance.
      "I never drew it mild yet, and I shan't begin now. All our political offences against
      civilization have come from men drawing it mild, as you call it. Why is it that Englishmen
      can't read and write as Americans do? Why can't they vote as they do even in Imperial France?
      Why are they serfs, less free than those whose chains were broken the other day in Russia? Why
      is the Spaniard more happy, and the Italian more contented? Because men in power have been
      drawing it mild!" And Mr. Bott made an action with his hand as though he were drawing up beer
      from a patent tap.
"But you can't set aside Her Majesty like that, you know," said the young Member, who had
      been presented, and whose mother's old-world notions about the throne still clung to him.
"I should be very sorry," said Mr. Bott; "I'm no republican." With all his constitutional
      love, Mr. Bott did not know what the word republican meant. "I mean no disrespect to the
      throne. The throne in its place is very well. But the power of governing this great nation
      does not rest with the throne. It is contained within the four walls of the House of Commons.
      That is the great truth which all young Members should learn, and take to their hearts."
"And you think Planty Pall will become Prime Minister?" said Calder Jones.
"I haven't said that; but there are more unlikely things. Among young men I know no man more
      likely. But I certainly think this,—that if Lord Brock doesn't take him into the Cabinet, Lord
      Brock won't long remain there himself."
In the meantime the election came on in the Chelsea districts, and the whole of the
      south-western part of the metropolis was covered with posters bearing George Vavasor's name.
      "Vote for Vavasor and the River Bank." That was the cry with which he went to the electors;
      and though it must be presumed that it was understood by some portion of the Chelsea electors,
      it was perfectly unintelligible to the majority of those who read it. His special
      acquaintances and his general enemies called him Viscount Riverbank, and he was pestered on
      all sides by questions as to Father Thames. It was Mr. Scruby who invented the legend, and who
      gave George Vavasor an infinity of trouble by the invention. There was a question in those
      days as to embanking the river from the Houses of Parliament up to the remote desolations of
      further Pimlico, and Mr. Scruby recommended the coming Member to pledge himself that he would
      have the work carried on even to Battersea Bridge. "You must have a subject," pleaded Mr.
      Scruby. "No young Member can do anything without a subject. And it should be local;—that is to
      say, if you have anything of a constituency. Such a subject as that, if it's well worked, may
      save you thousands of pounds—thousands of pounds at future elections."
"It won't save me anything at this one, I take it."
"But it may secure the seat, Mr. Vavasor, and afterwards make you the most popular
      metropolitan Member in the House; that is, with your own constituency. Only look at the money
      that would be spent in the districts if that were done! It would come to millions, sir!"
"But it never will be done."
"What matters that?" and Mr. Scruby almost became eloquent as he explained the nature of a
      good parliamentary subject. "You should work it up, so as to be able to discuss it at all
      points. Get the figures by heart, and then, as nobody else will do so, nobody can put you
      down. Of course it won't be done. If it were done, that would be an end of it, and your bread
      would be taken out of your mouth. But you can always promise it at the hustings, and can
      always demand it in the House. I've known men who've walked into as much as two thousand a
      year, permanent place, on the strength of a worse subject than that!"
Vavasor allowed Mr. Scruby to manage the matter for him, and took up the subject of the
      River Bank. "Vavasor and the River Bank" was carried about by an army of men with iron
      shoulder-straps, and huge pasteboard placards six feet high on the top of them. You would
      think, as you saw the long rows, that the men were being marshalled to their several routes;
      but they always kept together—four-and-twenty at the heels of each other. "One placard at a
      time would strike the eye," said Mr. Vavasor, counting the expense up to himself. "There's no
      doubt of it," said Mr. Scruby in reply. "One placard will do that, if it's big enough; but it
      takes four-and-twenty to touch the imagination." And then sides of houses were covered with
      that shibboleth—"Vavasor and the River Bank"—the same words repeated in columns down the whole
      sides of houses. Vavasor himself declared that he was ashamed to walk among his future
      constituents, so conspicuous had his name become. Grimes saw it, and was dismayed. At first,
      Grimes ridiculed the cry with all his publican's wit. "Unless he mean to drown hisself in the
      Reach, it's hard to say what he do mean by all that gammon about the River Bank," said Grimes,
      as he canvassed for the other Liberal candidate. But, after a while, Grimes was driven to
      confess that Mr. Scruby knew what he was about. "He is a sharp 'un, that he is," said Grimes
      in the inside bar of the "Handsome Man;" and he almost regretted that he had left the
      leadership of Mr. Scruby, although he knew that on this occasion he would not have gotten his
      odd money.
George Vavasor, with much labour, actually did get up the subject of the River Bank. He got
      himself introduced to men belonging to the Metropolitan Board, and went manfully into the
      matter of pounds, shillings, and pence. He was able even to work himself into an apparent heat
      when he was told that the thing was out of the question; and soon found that he had disciples
      who really believed in him. If he could have brought himself to believe in the thing,—if he
      could have been induced himself to care whether Chelsea was to be embanked or no, the work
      would not have been so difficult to him. In that case it would have done good to him, if to no
      one else. But such belief was beyond him. He had gone too far in life to be capable of
      believing in, or of caring for, such things. He was ambitious of having a hand in the
      government of his country, but he was not capable of caring even for that.
But he worked. He worked hard, and spoke vehemently, and promised the men of Chelsea,
      Pimlico, and Brompton that the path of London westwards had hardly commenced as yet. Sloane
      Street should be the new Cheapside. Squares should arise around the Chelsea barracks, with
      sides open to the water, for which Belgravia would be deserted. There should be palaces there
      for the rich, because the rich spend their riches; but no rich man's palace should interfere
      with the poor man's right to the River Bank. Three millions and a half should be spent on the
      noble street to be constructed, the grandest pathway that the world should ever yet have seen;
      three millions and a half to be drawn from,—to be drawn from anywhere except from
      Chelsea;—from the bloated money-bags of the City Corporation, Vavasor once ventured to
      declare, amidst the encouraging shouts of the men of Chelsea. Mr. Scruby was forced to own
      that his pupil worked the subject well. "Upon my word, that was uncommon good," he said,
      almost patting Vavasor on the back, after a speech in which he had vehemently asserted that
      his ambition to represent the Chelsea districts had all come of his long-fixed idea that the
      glory of future London would be brought about by the embankment of the river at Chelsea.
But armies of men carrying big boards, and public-houses open at every corner, and placards
      in which the letters are three feet long, cost money. Those few modest hundreds which Mr.
      Scruby had already received before the work began, had been paid on the supposition that the
      election would not take place till September. Mr. Scruby made an early request, a very early
      request, that a further sum of fifteen hundred pounds should be placed in his hands; and he
      did this in a tone which clearly signified that not a man would be sent about through the
      streets, or a poster put upon a wall, till this request had been conceded. Mr. Scruby was in
      possession of two very distinct manners of address. In his jovial moods, when he was
      instigating his clients to fight their battles well, it might almost be thought that he was
      doing it really for the love of the thing; and some clients, so thinking, had believed for a
      few hours that Scruby, in his jolly, passionate eagerness, would pour out his own money like
      dust, trusting implicitly to future days for its return. But such clients had soon encountered
      Mr. Scruby's other manner, and had perceived that they were mistaken.
The thing had come so suddenly upon George Vavasor that there was not time for him to carry
      on his further operations through his sister. Had he written to Kate,—let him have written in
      what language he would,—she would have first rejoined by a negative, and there would have been
      a correspondence before he had induced her to comply. He thought of sending for her by
      telegram, but even in that there would have been too much delay. He resolved, therefore, to
      make his application to Alice himself, and he wrote to her, explaining his condition. The
      election had come upon him quite suddenly, as she knew, he said. He wanted two thousand pounds
      instantly, and felt little scruple in asking her for it, as he was aware that the old Squire
      would be only too glad to saddle the property with a legacy to Alice for the repayment of this
      money, though he would not have advanced a shilling himself for the purpose of the election.
      Then he said a word or two as to his prolonged absence from Queen Anne Street. He had not been
      there because he had felt, from her manner when they last met, that she would for a while
      prefer to be left free from the unavoidable excitement of such interviews. But should he be
      triumphant in his present contest, he should go to her to share his triumph with her; or,
      should he fail, he should go to her to console him in his failure.
Within three days he heard from her, saying that the money would be at once placed to his
      credit. She sent him also her candid good wishes for success in his enterprise, but beyond
      this her letter said nothing. There was no word of love,—no word of welcome,—no expression of
      a desire to see him. Vavasor, as he perceived all this in the reading of her note, felt a
      triumph in the possession of her money. She was ill-using him by her coldness, and there was
      comfort in revenge. "It serves her right," he said to himself. "She should have married me at
      once when she said she would do so, and then it would have been my own."
When Mr. Tombe had communicated with John Grey on the matter of this increased demand,—this
      demand which Mr. Tombe began to regard as carrying a love-affair rather too far,—Grey had
      telegraphed back that Vavasor's demand for money, if made through Mr. John Vavasor, was to be
      honoured to the extent of five thousand pounds. Mr. Tombe raised his eyebrows, and reflected
      that some men were very foolish. But John Grey's money matters were of such a nature as to
      make Mr. Tombe know that he must do as he was bidden; and the money was paid to George
      Vavasor's account.
He told Kate nothing of this. Why should he trouble himself to do so? Indeed, at this time
      he wrote no letters to his sister, though she twice sent to him, knowing what his exigencies
      would be, and made further tenders of her own money. He could not reply to these offers
      without telling her that money had been forthcoming from that other quarter, and so he left
      them unanswered.
In the meantime the battle went on gloriously. Mr. Travers, the other Liberal candidate,
      spent his money freely,—or else some other person did so on his behalf. When Mr. Scruby
      mentioned this last alternative to George Vavasor, George cursed his own luck in that he had
      never found such backers. "I don't call a man half a Member when he's brought in like that,"
      said Mr. Scruby, comforting him. "He can't do what he likes with his vote. He ain't
      independent. You never hear of those fellows getting anything good. Pay for the article
      yourself, Mr. Vavasor, and then it's your own. That's what I always say."
Mr. Grimes went to work strenuously, almost fiercely, in the opposite interest, telling all
      that he knew, and perhaps more than he knew, of Vavasor's circumstances. He was at work
      morning, noon, and night, not only in his own neighbourhood, but among those men on the river
      bank of whom he had spoken so much in his interview with Vavasor in Cecil Street. The entire
      Vavasorian army with its placards was entirely upset on more than one occasion, and was once
      absolutely driven ignominiously into the river mud. And all this was done under the direction
      of Mr. Grimes. Vavasor himself was pelted with offal from the sinking tide, so that the very
      name of the River Bank became odious to him. He was a man who did not like to have his person
      touched, and when they hustled him he became angry. "Lord love you, Mr. Vavasor," said Scruby,
      "that's nothing! I've had a candidate so mauled,—it was in the Hamlets, I think,—that there
      wasn't a spot on him that wasn't painted with rotten eggs. The smell was something quite
      awful. But I brought him in, through it all."
And Mr. Scruby at last did as much for George Vavasor as he had done for the hero of the
      Hamlets. At the close of the poll Vavasor's name stood at the head by a considerable majority,
      and Scruby comforted him by saying that Travers certainly wouldn't stand the expense of a
      petition, as the seat was to be held only for a few months.
"And you've done it very cheap, Mr. Vavasor," said Scruby, "considering that the seat is
      metropolitan. I do say that you have done it cheap. Another thousand, or twelve hundred, will
      cover everything—say thirteen, perhaps, at the outside. And when you shall have fought the
      battle once again, you'll have paid your footing, and the fellows will let you in almost for
      nothing after that."
A further sum of thirteen hundred pounds was wanted at once, and then the whole thing was to
      be repeated over again in six months' time! This was not consolatory. But, nevertheless, there
      was a triumph in the thing itself which George Vavasor was man enough to enjoy. It would be
      something to have sat in the House of Commons, though it should only have been for half a
      session.
</div></body></text></TEI>