<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Can You Forgive Her?</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1865</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">
CHAPTER XXX. Containing a Love Letter.  
Vavasor, as he sat alone in his room, after Fitzgerald had left him, began to think of the
      days in which he had before wished to assist his friend in his views with reference to Lady
      Glencora;—or rather he began to think of Alice's behaviour then, and of Alice's words. Alice
      had steadfastly refused to give any aid. No less likely assistant for such a purpose could
      have been selected. But she had been very earnest in declaring that it was Glencora's duty to
      stand by her promise to Burgo. "He is a desperate spendthrift," Kate Vavasor had said to her.
      "Then let her teach him to be otherwise," Alice had answered. "That might have been a good
      reason for refusing his offer when he first made it; but it can be no excuse for untruth, now
      that she has told him that she loves him!" "If a woman," she had said again, "won't venture
      her fortune for the man she loves, her love is not worth having." All this George Vavasor
      remembered now; and as he remembered it he asked himself whether the woman that had once loved
      him would venture her fortune for him still.
Though his sister had pressed him on the subject with all the vehemence that she could use,
      he had hardly hitherto made up his mind that he really desired to marry Alice. There had grown
      upon him lately certain Bohemian propensities,—a love of absolute independence in his thoughts
      as well as actions,—which were antagonistic to marriage. He was almost inclined to think that
      marriage was an old-fashioned custom, fitted indeed well enough for the usual dull life of the
      world at large,—as many men both in heathen and in Christian ages have taught themselves to
      think of religion,—but which was not adapted to his advanced intelligence. If he loved any
      woman he loved his cousin Alice. If he thoroughly respected any woman he respected her. But
      that idea of tying himself down to a household was in itself distasteful to him. "It is a
      thing terrible to think of," he once said to a congenial friend in these days of his life,
      "that a man should give permission to a priest to tie him to another human being like a
      Siamese twin, so that all power of separate and solitary action should be taken from him for
      ever! The beasts of the field do not treat each other so badly. They neither drink themselves
      drunk, nor eat themselves stupid;—nor do they bind themselves together in a union which both
      would have to hate." In this way George Vavasor, trying to imitate the wisdom of the brutes,
      had taught himself some theories of a peculiar nature. But, nevertheless, as he thought of
      Alice Vavasor on this occasion, he began to feel that if a Siamese twin were necessary for
      him, she of all others was the woman to whom he would wish to be so bound.
And if he did it at all, he must do it now. Under the joint instigation of himself and his
      sister,—as he thought, and perhaps not altogether without reason,—she had broken her
      engagement with Mr. Grey. That she would renew it again if left to herself, he believed
      probable. And then, despite that advanced intelligence which had taught him to regard all
      forms and ceremonies with the eye of a philosopher, he had still enough of human frailty about
      him to feel keenly alive to the pleasure of taking from John Grey the prize which John Grey
      had so nearly taken from him. If Alice could have been taught to think as he did as to the
      absurdity of those indissoluble ties, that would have been better. But nothing would have been
      more impossible than the teaching of such a lesson to his cousin Alice. George Vavasor was a
      man of courage, and dared do most things;—but he would not have dared to commence the teaching
      of such a lesson to her.
And now, at this moment, what was his outlook into life generally? He had very high
      ambition, and a fair hope of gratifying it if he could only provide that things should go well
      with him for a year or so. He was still a poor man, having been once nearly a rich man; but
      still so much of the result of his nearly acquired riches remained to him, that on the
      strength of them he might probably find his way into Parliament. He had paid the cost of the
      last attempt, and might, in a great degree, carry on this present attempt on credit. If he
      succeeded there would be open to him a mode of life, agreeable in itself, and honourable among
      men. But how was he to bear the cost of this for the next year, or the next two years? His
      grandfather was still alive, and would probably live over that period. If he married Alice he
      would do so with no idea of cheating her out of her money. She should learn,—nay, she had
      already learned from his own lips,—how perilous was his enterprise. But he knew her to be a
      woman who would boldly risk all in money, though no consideration would induce her to stir a
      hair's breadth towards danger in reputation. Towards teaching her that doctrine at which I
      have hinted, he would not have dared to make an attempt; but he felt that he should have no
      repugnance to telling her that he wanted to spend all her money in the first year or two of
      their married life!
He was still in his arm-chair, thinking of all this, with that small untasted modicum of
      brandy and water beside him, when he heard some distant Lambeth clock strike three from over
      the river. Then he rose from his seat, and taking the candles in his hand, sat himself down at
      a writing-desk on the other side of the room. "I needn't send it when it's written," he said
      to himself, "and the chances are that I won't." Then he took his paper, and wrote as follows:—
       
Dear Alice,The time was when the privilege was mine of beginning my
       letters to you with a warmer show of love than the above word contains,—when I might and did
       call you dearest; but I lost that privilege through my own folly, and since that it has been
       accorded to another. But you have found,—with a thorough honesty of purpose than which I know
       nothing greater,—that it has behoved you to withdraw that privilege also. I need hardly say
       that I should not have written as I now write, had you not found it expedient to do as you
       have done. I now once again ask you to be my wife. In spite of all that passed in those old
       days,—of all the selfish folly of which I was then guilty, I think you know, and at the time
       knew, that I ever loved you. I claim to say for myself that my love to you was true from
       first to last, and I claim from you belief for that statement. Indeed I do not think that you
       ever doubted my love.Nevertheless, when you told me that I might no longer hope to
       make you my wife, I had no word of remonstrance that I could utter. You acted as any woman
       would act whom love had not made a fool. Then came the episode of Mr. Grey; and bitter as
       have been my feelings whilst that engagement lasted, I never made any attempt to come between
       you and the life you had chosen. In saying this I do not forget the words which I spoke last
       summer at Basle, when, as far as I knew, you still intended that he should be your husband.
       But what I said then was nothing to that which, with much violence, I refrained from saying.
       Whether you remember those few words I cannot tell; but certainly you would not have
       remembered them,—would not even have noticed them,—had your heart been at
       Nethercoats.But all this is nothing. You are now again a free woman; and once again I
       ask you to be my wife. We are both older than we were when we loved before, and will both be
       prone to think of marriage in a somewhat different light. Then personal love for each other
       was most in our thoughts. God forbid that it should not be much in our thoughts now! Perhaps
       I am deceiving myself in saying that it is not even now stronger in mine than any other
       consideration. But we have both reached that time of life, when it is probable that in any
       proposition of marriage we should think more of our adaptability to each other than we did
       before. For myself I know that there is much in my character and disposition to make me unfit
       to marry a woman of the common stamp. You know my mode of life, and what are my hopes and my
       chances of success. I run great risk of failing. It may be that I shall encounter ruin where
       I look for reputation and a career of honour. The chances are perhaps more in favour of ruin
       than of success. But, whatever may be the chances, I shall go on as long as any means of
       carrying on the fight are at my disposal. If you were my wife to-morrow I should expect to
       use your money, if it were needed, in struggling to obtain a seat in Parliament and a hearing
       there. I will hardly stoop to tell you that I do not ask you to be my wife for the sake of
       this aid;—but if you were to become my wife I should expect all your cooperation;—with your
       money, possibly, but certainly with your warmest spirit.And now, once again,
       Alice,—dearest Alice, will you be my wife? I have been punished, and I have kissed the
       rod,—as I never kissed any other rod. You cannot accuse my love. Since the time in which I
       might sit with my arm round your waist, I have sat with it round no other waist. Since your
       lips were mine, no other lips have been dear to me. Since you were my counsellor, I have had
       no other counsellor,—unless it be poor Kate, whose wish that we may at length be married is
       second in earnestness only to my own. Nor do I think you will doubt my repentance. Such
       repentance indeed claims no merit, as it has been the natural result of the loss which I have
       suffered. Providence has hitherto been very good to me in not having made that loss
       irremediable by your marriage with Mr. Grey. I wish you now to consider the matter well, and
       to tell me whether you can pardon me and still love me. Do I flatter myself when I feel that
       I doubt your pardon almost more than I doubt your love?Think of this thing in all its
       bearings before you answer me. I am so anxious that you should think of it that I will not
       expect your reply till this day week. It can hardly be your desire to go through life
       unmarried. I should say that it must be essential to your ambition that you should join your
       lot to that of some man the nature of whose aspirations would be like to your own. It is
       because this was not so as regarded him whose suit you had accepted, that you found yourself
       at last obliged to part from him. May I not say that with us there would be no such
       difference? It is because I believe that in this respect we are fitted for each other, as man
       and woman seldom are fitted, that I once again ask you to be my wife.This will reach
       you at Vavasor, where you will now be with the old squire and Kate. I have told her nothing
       of my purpose in writing this letter. If it should be that your answer is such as I desire, I
       should use the opportunity of our re-engagement to endeavour to be reconciled to my
       grandfather. He has misunderstood me and has ill-used me. But I am ready to forgive that, if
       he will allow me to do so. In such case you and Kate would arrange that, and I would, if
       possible, go down to Vavasor while you are there. But I am galloping on a-head foolishly in
       thinking of this, and am counting up my wealth while the crockery in my basket is so very
       fragile. One word from you will decide whether or no I shall ever bring it into
       market.If that word is to be adverse do not say anything of a meeting between me and
       the Squire. Under such circumstances it would be impossible. But, oh, Alice! do not let it be
       adverse. I think you love me. Your woman's pride towards me has been great and good and
       womanly; but it has had its way; and, if you love me, might now be taught to
       succumb.Dear Alice, will you be my wife?Yours, in any event, most
       affectionately,George Vavasor. 
Vavasor, when he had finished his letter, went back to his seat over the fire, and there he
      sat with it close at his hand for nearly an hour. Once or twice he took it up with fingers
      almost itching to throw it into the fire. He took it up and held the corners between his
      forefinger and thumb, throwing forward his hand towards the flame, as though willing that the
      letter should escape from him and perish if chance should so decide. But chance did not so
      decide, and the letter was put back upon the table at his elbow. Then when the hour was nearly
      over he read it again. "I'll bet two to one that she gives way," he said to himself, as he put
      the sheet of paper back into the envelope. "Women are such out-and-out fools." Then he took
      his candle, and carrying his letter with him, went into his bedroom.
The next morning was the morning of Christmas Eve. At about nine o'clock a boy came into his
      room who was accustomed to call for orders for the day. "Jem," he said to the boy, "there's
      half a crown lying there on the looking-glass." Jem looked and acknowledged the presence of
      the half-crown. "Is it a head or a tail, Jem?" asked the boy's master. Jem scrutinized the
      coin, and declared that the uppermost surface showed a tail. "Then take that letter and post
      it," said George Vavasor. Whereupon Jem, asking no question and thinking but little of the
      circumstances under which the command was given, did take the letter and did post it. In due
      accordance with postal regulations it reached Vavasor Hall and was delivered to Alice on the
      Christmas morning.
A merry Christmas did not fall to the lot of George Vavasor on the present occasion. An
      early Christmas-box he did receive in the shape of a very hurried note from his friend Burgo.
      "This will be brought to you by Stickling," the note said; but who Stickling was Vavasor did
      not know. "I send the bill. Couldn't you get the money and send it me, as I don't want to go
      up to town again before the thing comes off? You're a trump; and will do the best you can.
      Don't let that rogue off for less than a hundred and twenty.—Yours, B. F." Vavasor, therefore,
      having nothing better to do, spent his Christmas morning in calling on Mr. Magruin.
"Oh, Mr. Vavasor," said Magruin; "really this is no morning for business!"
"Time and tide wait for no man, Mr. Magruin, and my friend wants his money to-morrow."
"Oh, Mr. Vavasor,—to-morrow!"
"Yes, to-morrow. If time and tide won't wait, neither will love. Come, Mr. Magruin, out with
      your cheque-book, and don't let's have any nonsense."
"But is the lady sure, Mr. Vavasor?" asked Mr. Magruin, anxiously.
"Ladies never are sure," said Vavasor; "hardly more sure than bills made over to
      money-lenders. I'm not going to wait here all day. Are you going to give him the money?"
"Christmas-day, Mr. Vavasor! There's no getting money in the city to-day."
But Vavasor before he left did get the money from Mr. Magruin,—£122 10s.—for which an
      acceptance at two months for £500 was given in exchange,—and carried it off in triumph. "Do
      tell him to be punctual," said Mr. Magruin, when Vavasor took his leave. "I do so like young
      men to be punctual. But I really think Mr. Fitzgerald is the most unpunctual young man I ever
      did know yet."
"I think he is," said George Vavasor, as he went away.
He ate his Christmas dinner in absolute solitude at an eating-house near his lodgings. It
      may be supposed that no man dares to dine at his club on a Christmas Day. He at any rate did
      not so dare;—and after dinner he wandered about through the streets, wondering within his mind
      how he would endure the restraints of married life. And the same dull monotony of his days was
      continued for a week, during which he waited, not impatiently, for an answer to his letter.
      And before the end of the week the answer came.
</div></body></text></TEI>