<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Can You Forgive Her?</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1865</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="26">
CHAPTER XXVI. Lady Midlothian.  
A week or ten days after this, Alice, when she came down to the breakfast-parlour one
      morning, found herself alone with Mr. Bott. It was the fashion at Matching Priory for people
      to assemble rather late in the day. The nominal hour for breakfast was ten, and none of the
      ladies of the party were ever seen before that. Some of the gentlemen would breakfast earlier,
      especially on hunting mornings; and on some occasions the ladies, when they came together,
      would find themselves altogether deserted by their husbands and brothers. On this day it was
      fated that Mr. Bott alone should represent the sterner sex, and when Alice entered the room he
      was standing on the rug with his back to the fire, waiting till the appearance of some other
      guest should give him the sanction necessary for the commencement of his morning meal. Alice,
      when she saw him, would have retreated had it been possible, for she had learned to dislike
      him greatly, and was, indeed, almost afraid of him; but she could not do so without making her
      flight too conspicuous.
"Do you intend to prolong your stay here, Miss Vavasor?" said Mr. Bott, taking advantage of
      the first moment at which she looked up from a letter which she was reading.
"For a few more days, I think," said Alice.
"Ah—I'm glad of that. Mr. Palliser has pressed me so much to remain till he goes to the
      Duke's, that I cannot get away sooner. As I am an unmarried man myself, I can employ my time
      as well in one place as in another;—at this time of the year at least."
"You must find that very convenient," said Alice.
"Yes, it is convenient. You see in my position,—Parliamentary position, I mean,—I am
      obliged, as a public man, to act in concert with others. A public man can be of no service
      unless he is prepared to do that. We must give and take, you know, Miss Vavasor."
As Miss Vavasor made no remark in answer to this, Mr. Bott continued—"I always say to the
      men of my party,—of course I regard myself as belonging to the extreme Radicals."
"Oh, indeed!" said Alice.
"Yes. I came into Parliament on that understanding; and I have never seen any occasion as
      yet to change any political opinion that I have expressed. But I always say to the gentlemen
      with whom I act, that nothing can be done if we don't give and take. I don't mind saying to
      you, Miss Vavasor, that I look upon our friend, Mr. Palliser, as the most rising public man in
      the country. I do, indeed."
"I am happy to hear you say so," said his victim, who found herself driven to make some
      remark.
"And I, as an extreme Radical, do not think I can serve my party better than by keeping in
      the same boat with him, as long as it will hold the two. 'He'll make a Government hack of
      you,' a friend of mine said to me the other day. 'And I'll make a Manchester school Prime
      Minister of him,' I replied. I rather think I know what I'm about, Miss Vavasor."
"No doubt," said Alice.
"And so does he;—and so does he. Mr. Palliser is not the man to be led by the nose by any
      one. But it's a fair system of give and take. You can't get on in politics without it. What a
      charming woman is your relative, Lady Glencowrer! I remember well what you said to me the
      other evening."
"Do you?" said Alice.
"And I quite agree with you that confidential intercourse regarding dear friends should not
      be lightly made."
"Certainly not," said Alice.
"But there are occasions, Miss Vavasor; there are occasions when the ordinary laws by which
      we govern our social conduct must be made somewhat elastic."
"I don't think this one of them, Mr. Bott."
"Is it not? Just listen to me for one moment, Miss Vavasor. Our friend, Mr. Palliser, I am
      proud to say, relies much upon my humble friendship. Our first connection has, of course, been
      political; but it has extended beyond that, and has become pleasantly social;—I may say, very
      pleasantly social."
"What a taste Mr. Palliser must have!" Alice thought to herself.
"But I need not tell you that Lady Glencowrer is—very young; we may say, very young
      indeed."
"Mr. Bott, I will not talk to you about Lady Glencora Palliser."
This Alice said in a determined voice, and with all the power of resistance at her command.
      She frowned too, and looked savagely at Mr. Bott. But he was a man of considerable courage,
      and knew how to bear such opposition without flinching.
"When I tell you, Miss Vavasor, that I speak solely with a view to her domestic
      happiness!"
"I don't think that she wishes to have any such guardian of her happiness."
"But if he wishes it, Miss Vavasor! Now I have the means of knowing that he has the greatest
      reliance on your judgement."
Hereupon Alice got up with the intention of leaving the room, but she was met at the door by
      Mrs. Conway Sparkes.
"Are you running from your breakfast, Miss Vavasor?" said she.
"No, Mrs. Sparkes; I am running from Mr. Bott," said Alice, who was almost beside herself
      with anger.
"Mr. Bott, what is this?" said Mrs. Sparkes. "Ha, ha, ha," laughed Mr. Bott.
Alice returned to the room, and Mrs. Sparkes immediately saw that she had in truth been
      running from Mr. Bott. "I hope I shall be able to keep the peace," said she. "I trust his
      offence was not one that requires special punishment."
"Ha, ha, ha," again laughed Mr. Bott, who rather liked his position.
Alice was very angry with herself, feeling that she had told more of the truth to Mrs.
      Sparkes than she should have done, unless she was prepared to tell the whole. As it was, she
      wanted to say something, and did not know what to say; but her confusion was at once stopped
      by the entrance of Lady Glencora.
"Mrs. Sparkes, good morning," said Lady Glencora. "I hope nobody has waited breakfast. Good
      morning, Mr. Bott. Oh, Alice!"
"What is the matter?" said Alice, going up to her.
"Oh, Alice, such a blow!" But Alice could see that her cousin was not quite in earnest;—that
      the new trouble, though it might be vexatious, was no great calamity. "Come here," said Lady
      Glencora; and they both went into an embrasure of the window. "Now I shall have to put your
      confidence in me to the test. This letter is from,—whom do you think?"
"How can I guess?"
"From Lady Midlothian! and she's coming here on Monday, on her road to London. Unless you
      tell me that you are quite sure this is as unexpected by me as by you, I will never speak to
      you again."
"I am quite sure of that."
"Ah! then we can consult. But first we'll go and have some breakfast." Then more ladies
      swarmed into the room,—the Duchess and her daughter, and the two Miss Pallisers, and others;
      and Mr. Bott had his hands full in attending,—or rather in offering to attend, to their little
      wants.
The morning was nearly gone before Alice and her cousin had any further opportunity of
      discussing in private the approach of Lady Midlothian; but Mr. Palliser had come in among
      them, and had been told of the good thing which was in store for him. "We shall be delighted
      to see Lady Midlothian," said Mr. Palliser.
"But there is somebody here who will not be at all delighted to see her," said Lady Glencora
      to her husband.
"Is there, indeed?" said he. "Who is that?"
"Her most undutiful cousin, Alice Vavasor. But, Alice, Mr. Palliser knows nothing about it,
      and it is too long to explain."
"I am extremely sorry—" began Mr. Palliser.
"I can assure you it does not signify in the least," said Alice. "It will only be taking me
      away three days earlier."
Upon hearing this Mr. Palliser looked very serious. What quarrel could Miss Vavasor have had
      with Lady Midlothian which should make it impossible for them to be visitors at the same
      house?
"It will do no such thing," said Lady Glencora. "Do you mean to say that you are coward
      enough to run away from her?"
"I'm afraid, Miss Vavasor, that we can hardly bid her not come," said Mr. Palliser. In
      answer to this, Alice protested that she would not for worlds have been the means of keeping
      Lady Midlothian away from Matching. "I should tell you, Mr. Palliser, that I have never seen
      Lady Midlothian, though she is my far-away cousin. Nor have I ever quarrelled with her. But
      she has given me advice by letter, and I did not answer her because I thought she had no
      business to interfere. I shall go away, not because I am afraid of her, but because, after
      what has passed, our meeting would be unpleasant to her."
"You could tell her that Miss Vavasor is here," said Mr. Palliser. "And then she need not
      come unless she pleased."
The matter was so managed at last that Alice found herself unable to leave Matching without
      making more of Lady Midlothian's coming than it was worth. It would undoubtedly be very
      disagreeable,—this unexpected meeting with her relative; but, as Lady Glencora said, Lady
      Midlothian would not eat her. In truth, she felt ashamed of herself in that she was afraid of
      her relative. No doubt she was afraid of her. So much she was forced to admit to herself. But
      she resolved at last that she would not let her drive her out of the house.
"Is Mr. Bott an admirer of your cousin?" Mrs. Sparkes said that evening to Lady
      Glencora.
"A very distant one I should think," said Lady Glencora.
"Goodness gracious!" exclaimed an old lady who had been rather awed by Alice's intimacy and
      cousinship with Lady Glencora; "it's the very last thing I should have dreamt of."
"But I didn't dream it, first or last," said Mrs. Sparkes.
"Why do you ask?" said Lady Glencora.
"Don't suppose that I am asking whether Miss Vavasor is an admirer of his," said Mrs.
      Sparkes. "I have no suspicion of that nature. I rather think that when he plays Bacchus she
      plays Ariadne, with full intention of flying from him in earnest."
"Is Mr. Bott inclined to play Bacchus?" asked Lady Glencora.
"I rather thought he was this morning. If you observe, he has something of a godlike and
      triumphant air about him."
"I don't think his godship will triumph there," said Lady Glencora.
"I really think she would be throwing herself very much away," said the old lady.
"Miss Vavasor is not at all disposed to do that," said Mrs. Sparkes. Then that conversation
      was allowed to drop.
On the following Monday, Lady Midlothian arrived. The carriage was sent to meet her at the
      station about three o'clock in the afternoon, and Alice had to choose whether she would
      undergo her first introduction immediately on her relative's arrival, or whether she would
      keep herself out of the way till she should meet her in the drawing-room before dinner.
"I shall receive her when she comes," said Lady Glencora, "and of course will tell her that
      you are here."
"Yes, that will be best; and—; dear me, I declare I don't know how to manage it."
"I'll bring her to you in my room if you like it."
"No; that would be too solemn," said Alice. "That would make her understand that I thought a
      great deal about her."
"Then we'll let things take their chance, and you shall come across her just as you would
      any other stranger." It was settled at last that this would be the better course, but that
      Lady Midlothian was to be informed of Alice's presence at the Priory as soon as she should
      arrive.
Alice was in her own room when the carriage in which sat the unwelcome old lady was driven
      up to the hall-door. She heard the wheels plainly, and knew well that her enemy was within the
      house. She had striven hard all the morning to make herself feel indifferent to this arrival,
      but had not succeeded; and was angry with herself at finding that she sat up-stairs with an
      anxious heart, because she knew that her cousin was in the room down-stairs. What was Lady
      Midlothian to her that she should be afraid of her? And yet she was very much afraid of Lady
      Midlothian. She questioned herself on the subject over and over again, and found herself bound
      to admit that such was the fact. At last, about five o'clock, having reasoned much with
      herself, and rebuked herself for her own timidity, she descended into the drawing-room,—Lady
      Glencora having promised that she would at that hour be there,—and on opening the door became
      immediately conscious that she was in the presence of her august relative. There sat Lady
      Midlothian in a great chair opposite the fire, and Lady Glencora sat near to her on a stool.
      One of the Miss Pallisers was reading in a further part of the room, and there was no one else
      present in the chamber.
The Countess of Midlothian was a very little woman, between sixty and seventy years of age,
      who must have been very pretty in her youth. At present she made no pretension either to youth
      or beauty,—as some ladies above sixty will still do,—but sat confessedly an old woman in all
      her external relations. She wore a round bonnet which came much over her face,—being
      accustomed to continue the use of her bonnet till dinner time when once she had been forced by
      circumstances to put it on. She wore a short cloak which fitted close to her person, and,
      though she occupied a great arm-chair, sat perfectly upright, looking at the fire. Very small
      she was, but she carried in her grey eyes and sharp-cut features a certain look of importance
      which saved her from being considered as small in importance. Alice, as soon as she saw her,
      knew that she was a lady over whom no easy victory could be obtained.
"Here is Alice," said Lady Glencora, rising as her cousin entered the room. "Alice, let me
      introduce you to Lady Midlothian."
Alice, as she came forward, was able to assume an easy demeanour, even though her heart
      within was failing her. She put out her hand, leaving it to the elder lady to speak the first
      words of greeting.
"I am glad at last to be able to make your acquaintance, my dear," said Lady Midlothian;
      "very glad." But still Alice did not speak. "Your aunt, Lady Macleod, is one of my oldest
      friends, and I have heard her speak of you very often."
"And Lady Macleod has often spoken to me of your ladyship," said Alice.
"Then we know each other's names," said the Countess; "and it will be well that we should be
      acquainted with each other's persons. I am becoming an old woman, and if I did not learn to
      know you now, or very shortly, I might never do so."
Alice could not help thinking that even under those circumstances neither might have had, so
      far as that was concerned, much cause of sorrow, but she did not say so. She was thinking
      altogether of Lady Midlothian's letter to her, and trying to calculate whether or no it would
      be well for her to rush away at once to the subject. That Lady Midlothian would mention the
      letter, Alice felt well assured; and when could it be better mentioned than now, in Glencora's
      presence,—when no other person was near them to listen to her? "You are very kind," said
      Alice.
"I would wish to be so," said Lady Midlothian. "Blood is thicker than water, my dear; and I
      know no earthly ties that can bind people together if those of family connection will not do
      so. Your mother, when she and I were young, was my dearest friend."
"I never knew my mother," said Alice,—feeling, however, as she spoke, that the strength of
      her resistance to the old woman was beginning to give way.
"No, my dear, you never did; and that is to my thinking another reason why they who loved
      her should love you. But Lady Macleod is your nearest relative,—on your mother's side, I
      mean,—and she has done her duty by you well."
"Indeed she has, Lady Midlothian."
"She has, and others, therefore, have been the less called upon to interfere. I only say
      this, my dear, in my own vindication,—feeling, perhaps, that my conduct needs some
      excuse."
"I'm sure Alice does not think that," said Lady Glencora.
"It is what I think rather than what Alice thinks that concerns my own shortcomings," said
      Lady Midlothian, with a smile which was intended to be pleasant. "But I have wished to make up
      for former lost opportunities." Alice knew that she was about to refer to her letter, and
      trembled. "I am very anxious now to be reckoned one of Alice Vavasor's friends, if she will
      allow me to become so."
"I can only be too proud,—if—"
"If what, my dear?" said the old lady. I believe that she meant to be gracious, but there
      was something in her manner, or, perhaps, rather in her voice, so repellant, that Alice felt
      that they could hardly become true friends. "If what, my dear?"
"Alice means—" began Lady Glencora.
"Let Alice say what she means herself," said Lady Midlothian.
"I hardly know how to say what I do mean," said Alice, whose spirit within her was rising
      higher as the occasion for using it came upon her. "I am assured that you and I, Lady
      Midlothian, differ very much as to a certain matter; and as it is one in which I must be
      guided by my own opinion, and not that of any other person, perhaps—"
"You mean about Mr. Grey?"
"Yes," said Alice; "I mean about Mr. Grey."
"I think so much about that matter, and your happiness as therein concerned, that when I
      heard that you were here I was determined to take Matching in my way to London, so that I
      might have an opportunity of speaking to you."
"Then you knew that Alice was here," said Lady Glencora.
"Of course I did. I suppose you have heard all the history, Glencora?"
Lady Glencora was forced to acknowledge that she had heard the history,—"the history" being
      poor Alice's treatment of Mr. Grey.
"And what do you think of it?" Both Alice and her hostess looked round to the further end of
      the room in which Miss Palliser was reading, intending thus to indicate that the lady knew as
      yet none of the circumstances, and that there could be no good reason why she should be
      instructed in them at this moment. "Perhaps another time and another place may be better,"
      said Lady Midlothian; "but I must go the day after to-morrow,—indeed, I thought of going
      to-morrow."
"Oh, Lady Midlothian!" exclaimed Lady Glencora.
"You must regard this as merely a passing visit, made upon business. But, as I was saying,
      when shall I get an opportunity of speaking to Alice where we need not be interrupted?"
Lady Glencora suggested her room up-stairs, and offered the use of it then, or on that night
      when the world should be about to go to bed. But the idea of this premeditated lecture was
      terrible to Alice, and she determined that she would not endure it.
"Lady Midlothian, it would really be of no use."
"Of no use, my dear!"
"No, indeed. I did get your letter, you know."
"And as you have not answered it, I have come all this way to see you."
"I shall be so sorry if I give offence, but it is a subject which I cannot bring myself to
      discuss"—she was going to say with a stranger, but she was able to check herself before the
      offensive word was uttered,—"which I cannot bring myself to discuss with any one."
"But you don't mean to say that you won't see me?"
"I will not talk upon that matter," said Alice. "I will not do it even with Lady
      Macleod."
"No," said Lady Midlothian, and her sharp grey eyes now began to kindle with anger; "and
      therefore it is so very necessary that other friends should interfere."
"But I will endure no interference," said Alice, "either from persons who are friends or who
      are not friends." And as she spoke she rose from her chair. "You must forgive me, Lady
      Midlothian, if I say that I can have no conversation with you on this matter." Then she walked
      out of the room, leaving the Countess and Lady Glencora together. As she went Miss Palliser
      lifted her eyes from her book, and knew that there had been a quarrel, but I doubt if she had
      heard any of the words which had been spoken.
"The most self-willed young woman I ever met in my life," said Lady Midlothian, as soon as
      Alice was gone.

"I knew very well how it would be," said Lady Glencora.
"But it is quite frightful, my dear. She has been engaged, with the consent of all her
      friends, to this young man."
"I know all about it."
"But you must think she is very wrong."
"I don't quite understand her, but I suppose she fears they would not be happy
      together."
"Understand her! I should think not; nobody can understand her. A young woman to become
      engaged to a gentleman in that way,—before all the world, as one may say;—to go to his house,
      as I am told, and talk to the servants, and give orders about the furniture and then turn
      round and simply say that she has changed her mind! She hasn't given the slightest reason to
      my knowledge." And Lady Midlothian, as she insisted on the absolute iniquity of Alice's
      proceedings, almost startled Lady Glencora by the eagerness of her countenance. Lady
      Midlothian had been one of those who, even now not quite two years ago, had assisted in
      obtaining the submission of Lady Glencora herself. Lady Midlothian seemed on the present
      occasion to remember nothing of this, but Lady Glencora remembered it very exactly. "I shall
      not give it up," continued Lady Midlothian. "I have the greatest possible objection to her
      father, who contrived to connect himself with our family in a most shameful manner, without
      the slightest encouragement. I don't think I have spoken to him since, but I shall see him now
      and tell him my opinion."
Alice held her ground, and avoided all further conversation with Lady Midlothian. A message
      came to her through Lady Glencora imploring her to give way, but she was quite firm.
"Good-bye to you," Lady Midlothian said to her as she went. "Even yet I hope that things may
      go right, and if so you will find that I can forget and forgive."
"If perseverance merits success," said Lady Glencora to Alice, "she ought to succeed." "But
      she won't succeed," said Alice.
</div></body></text></TEI>