<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Can You Forgive Her?</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1865</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="45">
CHAPTER XLV. George Vavasor Takes His Seat.  
George Vavasor's feeling of triumph was not unjustifiable. It is something to have sat in
      the House of Commons, though it has been but for one session! There is on the left-hand side
      of our great national hall,—on the left-hand side as one enters it, and opposite to the doors
      leading to the Law Courts,—a pair of gilded lamps, with a door between them, near to which a
      privileged old dame sells her apples and her oranges solely, as I presume, for the
      accommodation of the Members of the House and of the great policeman who guards the pass.
      Between those lamps is the entrance to the House of Commons, and none but Members may go that
      way! It is the only gate before which I have ever stood filled with envy,—sorrowing to think
      that my steps might never pass under it. There are many portals forbidden to me, as there are
      many forbidden to all men; and forbidden fruit, they say, is sweet; but my lips have watered
      after no other fruit but that which grows so high, within the sweep of that great policeman's
      truncheon.
Ah, my male friend and reader, who earnest thy bread, perhaps, as a country vicar; or
      sittest, may-be, at some weary desk in Somerset House; or who, perhaps, rulest the yard behind
      the Cheapside counter, hast thou never stood there and longed,—hast thou never confessed, when
      standing there, that Fate has been unkind to thee in denying thee the one thing that thou hast
      wanted? I have done so; and as my slow steps have led me up that more than royal staircase, to
      those passages and halls which require the hallowing breath of centuries to give them the
      glory in British eyes which they shall one day possess, I have told myself, in anger and in
      grief, that to die and not to have won that right of way, though but for a session,—not to
      have passed by the narrow entrance through those lamps,—is to die and not to have done that
      which it most becomes an Englishman to have achieved.
There are, doubtless, some who come out by that road, the loss of whose society is not to be
      regretted. England does not choose her six hundred and fifty-four best men. One comforts one's
      self, sometimes, with remembering that. The George Vavasors, the Calder Joneses, and the Botts
      are admitted. Dishonesty, ignorance, and vulgarity do not close the gate of that heaven
      against aspirants; and it is a consolation to the ambition of the poor to know that the
      ambition of the rich can attain that glory by the strength of its riches alone. But though
      England does not send thither none but her best men, the best of her Commoners do find their
      way there. It is the highest and most legitimate pride of an Englishman to have the letters
      M.P. written after his name. No selection from the alphabet, no doctorship, no fellowship, be
      it of ever so learned or royal a society, no knightship,—not though it be of the
      Garter,—confers so fair an honour. Mr. Bott was right when he declared that this country is
      governed from between the walls of that House, though the truth was almost defiled by the lips
      which uttered it. He might have added that from thence flow the waters of the world's
      progress,—the fullest fountain of advancing civilization.
George Vavasor, as he went in by the lamps and the apple-stall, under the guardianship of
      Mr. Bott, felt all the pride of which I have been speaking. He was a man quite capable of
      feeling such pride as it should be felt,—capable, in certain dreamy moments, of looking at the
      thing with pure and almost noble eyes; of understanding the ambition of serving with truth so
      great a nation as that which fate had made his own. Nature, I think, had so fashioned George
      Vavasor, that he might have been a good, and perhaps a great man; whereas Mr. Bott had been
      born small. Vavasor had educated himself to badness with his eyes open. He had known what was
      wrong, and had done it, having taught himself to think that bad things were best. But poor Mr.
      Bott had meant to do well, and thought that he had done very well indeed. He was a tuft-hunter
      and a toady, but he did not know that he was doing amiss in seeking to rise by tuft-hunting
      and toadying. He was both mean and vain, both a bully and a coward, and in politics, I fear,
      quite unscrupulous in spite of his grand dogmas; but he believed that he was progressing in
      public life by the proper and usual means, and was troubled by no idea that he did wrong.
Vavasor, in those dreamy moments of which I have spoken, would sometimes feel tempted to cut
      his throat and put an end to himself, because he knew that he had taught himself amiss. Again
      he would sadly ask himself whether it was yet too late; always, however, answering himself
      that it was too late. Even now, at this moment, as he went in between the lamps, and felt much
      of the honest pride of which I have spoken, he told himself that it was too late. What could
      he do now, hampered by such a debt as that which he owed to his cousin, and with the knowledge
      that it must be almost indefinitely increased, unless he meant to give up this seat in
      Parliament, which had cost him so dearly, almost before he had begun to enjoy it? But his
      courage was good, and he was able to resolve that he would go on with the business that he had
      in hand, and play out his game to the end. He had achieved his seat in the House of Commons,
      and was so far successful. Men who had ever been gracious to him were now more gracious than
      ever, and they who had not hitherto treated him with courtesy, now began to smile and to be
      very civil. It was, no doubt, a great thing to have the privilege of that entrance between the
      lamps.
Mr. Bott had the new Member now in hand, not because there had been any old friendship
      between them, but Mr. Bott was on the look-out for followers, and Vavasor was on the look-out
      for a party. A man gets no great thanks for attaching himself to existing power. Our friend
      might have enrolled himself among the general supporters of the Government without attracting
      much attention. He would in such case have been at the bottom of a long list. But Mr. Palliser
      was a rising man, round whom, almost without wish of his own, a party was forming itself. If
      he came into power,—as come he must, according to Mr. Bott and many others,—then they who had
      acknowledged the new light before its brightness had been declared, might expect their
      reward.
Vavasor, as he passed through the lobby to the door of the House, leaning on Mr. Bott's arm,
      was very silent. He had spoken but little since they had left their cab in Palace Yard, and
      was not very well pleased by the garrulity of his companion. He was going to sit among the
      first men of his nation, and to take his chance of making himself one of them. He believed in
      his own ability; he believed thoroughly in his own courage; but he did not believe in his own
      conduct. He feared that he had done,—feared still more strongly that he would be driven to
      do,—that which would shut men's ears against his words, and would banish him from high places.
      No man believes in himself who knows himself to be a rascal, however great may be his talent,
      or however high his pluck.
"Of course you have heard a debate?" said Mr. Bott.
"Yes," answered Vavasor, who wished to remain silent.
"Many, probably?"
"No."
"But you have heard debates from the gallery. Now you'll hear them from the body of the
      House, and you'll find how very different it is. There's no man can know what Parliament is
      who has never had a seat. Indeed no one can thoroughly understand the British Constitution
      without it. I felt, very early in life, that that should be my line; and though it's hard work
      and no pay, I mean to stick to it. How do, Thompson? You know Vavasor? He's just returned for
      the Chelsea Districts, and I'm taking him up. We shan't divide to-night; shall we? Look!
      there's Farringcourt just coming out; he's listened to better than any man in the House now,
      but he'll borrow half-a-crown from you if you'll lend him one. How d'ye do, my lord? I hope I
      have the pleasure of seeing you well?" and Bott bowed low to a lord who was hurrying through
      the lobby as fast as his shuffling feet would carry him. "Of course you know him?"
Vavasor, however, did not know the lord in question, and was obliged to say so.
"I thought you were up to all these things?" said Bott.
"Taking the peerage generally, I am not up to it," said Vavasor, with a curl on his lip.
"But you ought to have known him. That was Viscount Middlesex; he has got something on
      to-night about the Irish Church. His father is past ninety, and he's over sixty. We'll go in
      now; but let me give you one bit of advice, my dear fellow—don't think of speaking this
      session. A Member can do no good at that work till he has learned something of the forms of
      the House. The forms of the House are everything; upon my word they are. This is Mr. Vavasor,
      the new Member for the Chelsea Districts."
Our friend was thus introduced to the doorkeeper, who smiled familiarly, and seemed to wink
      his eye. Then George Vavasor passed through into the House itself, under the wing of Mr.
      Bott.
Vavasor, as he walked up the House to the Clerk's table and took the oath and then walked
      down again, felt himself to be almost taken aback by the little notice which was accorded to
      him. It was not that he had expected to create a sensation, or that he had for a moment
      thought on the subject, but the thing which he was doing was so great to him, that the total
      indifference of those around him was a surprise to him. After he had taken his seat, a few men
      came up by degrees and shook hands with him; but it seemed, as they did so, merely because
      they were passing that way. He was anxious not to sit next to Mr. Bott, but he found himself
      unable to avoid this contiguity. That gentleman stuck to him pertinaciously, giving him
      directions which, at the spur of the moment, he hardly knew how not to obey. So he found
      himself sitting behind Mr. Palliser, a little to the right, while Mr. Bott occupied the ear of
      the rising man.
There was a debate in progress, but it seemed to Vavasor, as soon as he was able to become
      critical, to be but a dull affair, and yet the Chancellor of the Exchequer was on his legs,
      and Mr. Palliser was watching him as a cat watches a mouse. The speaker was full of figures,
      as becomes a Chancellor of the Exchequer; and as every new budget of them fell from him, Mr.
      Bott, with audible whispers, poured into the ear of his chief certain calculations of his own,
      most of which went to prove that the financier in office was altogether wrong. Vavasor thought
      that he could see that Mr. Palliser was receiving more of his assistance than was palatable to
      him. He would listen, if he did listen, without making any sign that he heard, and would
      occasionally shake his head with symptoms of impatience. But Mr. Bott was a man not to be
      repressed by a trifle. When Mr. Palliser shook his head he became more assiduous than ever,
      and when Mr. Palliser slightly moved himself to the left, he boldly followed him.
No general debate arose on the subject which the Minister had in hand, and when he sat down,
      Mr. Palliser would not get up, though Mr. Bott counselled him to do so. The matter was over
      for the night, and the time had arrived for Lord Middlesex. That nobleman got upon his feet,
      with a roll of papers in his hand, and was proceeding to address the House on certain matters
      of church reform, with great energy; but, alas, for him and for his feelings! before his
      energy had got itself into full swing, the Members were swarming away through the doors like a
      flock of sheep. Mr. Palliser got up and went, and was followed at once by Mr. Bott, who
      succeeded in getting hold of his arm in the lobby. Had not Mr. Palliser been an even-tempered,
      calculating man, with a mind and spirit well under his command, he must have learned to hate
      Mr. Bott before this time. Away streamed the Members, but still the noble lord went on
      speaking, struggling hard to keep up his fire as though no such exodus were in process. There
      was but little to console him. He knew that the papers would not report one sentence in twenty
      of those he uttered. He knew that no one would listen to him willingly. He knew that he had
      worked for weeks and months to get up his facts, and he was beginning to know that he had
      worked in vain. As he summoned courage to look round, he began to fear that some enemy would
      count the House, and that all would be over. He had given heart and soul to this affair. His
      cry was not as Vavasor's cry about the River Bank. He believed in his own subject with a great
      faith, thinking that he could make men happier and better, and bring them nearer to their God.
      I said that he had worked for weeks and months. I might have said that he had been all his
      life at this work. Though he shuffled with his feet when he walked, and knocked his words
      together when he talked, he was an earnest man, meaning to do well, seeking no other reward
      for his work than the appreciation of those whom he desired to serve. But this was never to be
      his. For him there was in store nothing but disappointment. And yet he will work on to the
      end, either in this House or in the other, labouring wearily, without visible wages of any
      kind, and, one may say, very sadly. But when he has been taken to his long rest, men will
      acknowledge that he has done something, and there will be left on the minds of those who shall
      remember him a conviction that he served a good cause diligently, and not altogether
      inefficiently. Invisible are his wages, yet in some coin are they paid. Invisible is the thing
      he does, and yet it is done. Let us hope that some sense of this tardy appreciation may soothe
      his spirit beyond the grave. On the present occasion there was nothing to soothe his spirit.
      The Speaker sat, urbane and courteous, with his eyes turned towards the unfortunate orator;
      but no other ears in the House seemed to listen to him. The corps of reporters had dwindled
      down to two, and they used their pens very listlessly, taking down here a sentence and there a
      sentence, knowing that their work was naught. Vavasor sat it out to the last, as it taught him
      a lesson in those forms of the House which Mr. Bott had truly told him it would be well that
      he should learn. And at last he did learn the form of a "count-out." Some one from a back seat
      muttered something, which the Speaker understood; and that high officer, having had his
      attention called to a fact of which he would never have taken cognizance without such calling,
      did count the House, and finding that it contained but twenty-three Members, he put an end to
      his own labours and to those of poor Lord Middlesex. With what feelings that noble lord must
      have taken himself home, and sat himself down in his study, vainly opening a book before his
      eyes, can we not all imagine? A man he was with ample means, with children who would do honour
      to his name; one whose wife believed in him, if no one else would do so; a man, let us say,
      with a clear conscience, to whom all good things had been given. But of whom now was he
      thinking with envy? Early on that same day Farringcourt had spoken in the House,—a man to whom
      no one would lend a shilling, whom the privilege of that House kept out of gaol, whose word no
      man believed; who was wifeless, childless, and unloved. But three hundred men had hung
      listening upon his words. When he laughed in his speech, they laughed; when he was indignant
      against the Minister, they sat breathless, as the Spaniard sits in the critical moment of the
      bull-killing. Whichever way he turned himself, he carried them with him. Crowds of Members
      flocked into the House from libraries and smoking-rooms when it was known that this
      ne'er-do-well was on his legs. The Strangers' Gallery was filled to overflowing. The reporters
      turned their rapid pages, working their fingers wearily till the sweat drops stood upon their
      brows. And as the Premier was attacked with some special impetus of redoubled irony, men
      declared that he would be driven to enrol the speaker among his colleagues, in spite of
      dishonoured bills and evil reports. A man who could shake the thunderbolts like that must be
      paid to shake them on the right side. It was of this man, and of his success, that Lord
      Middlesex was envious, as he sat, wretched and respectable, in his solitary study!
Mr. Bott had left the House with Mr. Palliser; and Vavasor, after the count-out, was able to
      walk home by himself, and think of the position which he had achieved. He told himself over
      and over again that he had done a great thing in obtaining that which he now possessed, and he
      endeavoured to teach himself that the price he was paying for it was not too dear. But already
      there had come upon him something of that feeling,—that terribly human feeling,—which deprives
      every prize that is gained of half its value. The mere having it robs the diamond of its
      purity, and mixes vile alloy with the gold. Lord Middlesex, as he had floundered on into
      terrible disaster, had not been a subject to envy. There had been nothing of brilliance in the
      debate, and the Members had loomed no larger than ordinary men at ordinary clubs. The very
      doorkeepers had hardly treated them with respect. The great men with whose names the papers
      are filled had sat silent, gloomy, and apparently idle. As soon as a fair opportunity was
      given them they escaped out of the House, as boys might escape from school. Everybody had
      rejoiced in the break-up of the evening, except that one poor old lord who had worked so hard.
      Vavasor had spent everything that he had to become a Member of that House, and now, as he went
      alone to his lodgings, he could not but ask himself whether the thing purchased was worth the
      purchase-money.
But his courage was still high. Though he was gloomy, and almost sad, he knew that he could
      trust himself to fight out the battle to the last. On the morrow he would go to Queen Anne
      Street, and would demand sympathy there from her who had professed to sympathize with him so
      strongly in his political desires. With her, at any rate, the glory of his Membership would
      not be dimmed by any untoward knowledge of the realities. She had only seen the play acted
      from the boxes; and to her eyes the dresses would still be of silk velvet, and the swords of
      bright steel.
</div></body></text></TEI>