<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">
CHAPTER VII.
I have cut my own throat," says Rivers ruefully, taking six addled eggs out of his
      pocket, in which he has carried them off, to prevent their being imposed as fresh upon any
      more unsuspecting travellers.
It is somewhat later in the day. They have shaken the dust of Lohmen off their feet; have
      tramped, faint and silent, along a charming road whose wayside flowers they do not see, and
      through a long straggling village whose high-pitched roofs and general picturesqueness they
      execrate, to Loch Mühle, whither, with premature confidence in the Lohmen Gasthof's powers of
      entertainment, they had sent on the carriage.
       They have passed down a gentle incline, and found at the foot the mill-house,
      sitting by the brisk mill-stream. The Frau Müllerin has brought them out excellent milk,
      coffee, cakes, and eggs, unimpeachably, splendidly fresh, and they have eaten them at a
      snowy-draped deal table, to the sound of the whizzing mill and the dripping water and the
      carolling birds. Here by the riverlet sits the floury mill, and past it the quick stream runs,
      and over a small weir, a few yards higher up, the noisy bright water pours. Ostensibly to look
      at the weir, but in reality only urged by that rage for being tête-à-tête which
      possesses such happy fools as they, even if it be only to say to one another, "How much dust!"
      or "How many flies!" Belinda and Rivers have left their companions, and now stand side by side
      at the river's edge.
"They might have got over the veal!" says Rivers, pensively regarding the eggs in his hand,
      previous to hurling them with vindictive force, one after the other, across the stream.

"Never!" interpolates Belinda, with emphasis.
"But it was these that gave them the coup de grâce !" adds the young man,
      wrathfully aiming the last one at an opposite rock, against which it breaks with a dull,
      addled thud. "I suppose they will never make an excursion with us again?"
"Never!" repeats Belinda, with still more energy. "I am sure that I would not, if I were
      they."
"Then next time," says Rivers hurriedly, and looking away, "we shall have to go by
      ourselves."
It is the most audacious and leading speech he has ever made her; and whether it be his own
      audacity or the picture his words have conjured up, his voice trembles. What a picture! A
      whole long summer- day!—she and he together, and alone! A day when he need never take his eyes
      off her; when he would ask leave to lie at her feet, and might pull her flowers and soft
      grasses, and could count her eyelashes and each breath she sweetly drew; and perhaps,
       at the very end of the day, if he were very good, and she in a very gentle mood
      —he has to own that she is not always gentle—she might give him one of her long white hands to
      kiss—once, just once! In his imagination he is already feeling its cool satin beneath his
      lips, when her reply comes and at once knocks down his card-house.
"How likely!" she says curtly, also turning her head, but in the opposite direction to that
      which he has turned his.
"You would not like it, of course?" he says, chapfallenly, and yet with a sort of slight
      interrogation in his tone.
She would not like it ! To herself she almost laughs. Is it possible that he does
      not guess that the reason why she has turned away her face is that she dares not let him see
      the stir and tumult that his mere suggestion has made there. But he would be very much
      keener-sighted, and a much greater coxcomb than he is, if he could draw this conclusion from
      her harsh and snubbing words.

"I never waste time," she says chillingly, "in speculating as to whether I should like or
      dislike what is absolutely out of the question."
There is a slight silence. Rivers feels as if a large pail of half-frozen water had been
      thrown over him, and were now trickling down the nape of his neck. Belinda is still hearing,
      with passionate vexation, the sound of her own ungracious voice. Why is it that she never can
      hit the juste milieu of cool and friendly civility? How is it that her heart is so
      burning hot, and her words so icy cold? Her eyes, averse from meeting the reproach of his,
      look across to where, on the other side of the racing beck, the rocks rise straight up, and
      out of their clefts slight little fir-trees grow, grasping the stony soil with their shallow
      roots, and dainty green birches wave, and just-new creasy ferns droop and sprout, and hang
      their small spring ensigns.
"What an iceberg you are!" says the young man at last, in a low tone of irrepressible
      mortification.

"An iceberg?" she repeats, lifting one hand to her face, and with her forefinger and thumb
      gently pinching her own trembling under-lip. "Yes; so I have often been told. I think," after
      a slight pause, "that I am a little tired of being told it."
"Are you tired of being it?" says Rivers, sinking his voice still more, though
      there is no one but the brook to overhear him, and it is much too occupied with its own sweet
      chatter to attend to him, and giving her a piercing look as he speaks.
For all answer she leaves him at once, and walks with such speed as if a mad bull were
      behind her, back to the other pair of sweethearts. He follows her, despair at his heart—the
      light lover's despair, that is to say, that a frown engenders and a smile kills; thinking,
      heart-sickly, that he will now have to redeem his own rash forward step by half a dozen
      tiresome retrograde ones.
But fortune deals more kindly with him than he had expected of her. The Professor and Sarah
      are both asleep. Coffee
       is generally supposed to be a wakeful potion; but in their case, mixed in nice
      proportions with fatigue, ill-humour, and boredom, it has had a precisely contrary effect. The
      Professor's head has dropped forward on his chest—always a trying position to anyone beyond
      rosy childhood; the veins on his forehead have started forward, the blood has run into his
      long nose, and his under-lip protrudes. It is clearly an unintended nap, which has overtaken
      him accidentally, in defiance of his rules, and contrary to his sanitary principles. Sarah's
      on the other hand, is the slumber, deliberately undertaken, of a person who sees in sleep the
      most endurable mode of getting over an irksome period of time. Her feet, carefully covered by
      a shawl, repose on a chair in front of her; a light ulster, rolled up so as to form a little
      bolster, nicks comfortably into the nape of her neck; her head is so much thrown back as to
      afford an excellent opportunity for cutting her charming white throat.
A smile breaks over Belinda's face.

"It would be a pity to disturb them," she says, whispering.
"A thousand pities!" assents he eagerly.
"Would not it be better," speaking with a timorousness born of his late rebuff, "for us to
      go out of earshot?"
She looks first at the mill, then relentingly at him.
"Should you think that there was a nice path beyond?" she asks demurely.
So through the noisy white mill they go, nodding friendlily to the powdery miller as they
      pass. Along the river path they saunter, rocks above their glad heads— rocks, not frowning nor
      grand, nor by any means very big and beetling, but with finest grass and yellow wallflowers
      nestled in their rifts, and making mimic gardens of their little ridges and crannies.
On their other hand the small river frolicking, and on its farther side rocks again, grass
      again, sun and flowers again: drooping birches and straight pines. At every step that carries
      them farther from the mill Rivers' spirits rise.

"I hope," he says, chuckling over the recollection—"I hope, for his own sake, that Professor
      Forth will awake first. If Miss Churchill sees him as we have just done I would not give much
      for his chance!"
"And I would not give much for it, whichever wakes first!" answers Belinda ominously.
By-and-by, though they are not at all tired, they sit down. After all, it is not so very
      unlike his vision—the vision that she had so disdainfully pooh-poohed. Nor when she speaks
      does she, as he half feared that she would, break the illusion, for her voice is gentle,
      almost apologetic.
"I should like to explain something to you, if you will attend to me."
If he will attend to her ! Could he ever dare to think that any utterance of his
      idol's might be nonsense, it would be now. If he will attend to her ! He who, if at
      dinner she ask him to pass the salt, listens with such entranced reverence as if it were to
      the Spheres together singing.

"Do I usually not attend when you speak?" he asks, with timid irony.
He has rested his elbow on a little plat of soft turf upon the rock, and his head on his
      right hand, which brings him fully an inch and a half nearer her (in itself no despicable
      gain), and is feasting with leisurely rapture—there must be no discomfort of posture to mar
      such high enjoyment —on each slow turn of her head, on its thick white throat; and without any
      fear of Sarah's gimlet eyes derisively perforating him.
"I know," continues Belinda, who is not leaning on either elbow, but is sitting very upright
      and looking shy—"I am conscious that I have taken things you have said to me —little harmless,
      unmeaning, civil things," with a hasty blush of fear lest she should be supposed to have
      attached too much importance to them—"very awkwardly! very surlily!"
"Have you?" he answers ruefully. "I do not think you have taken them at all!
       I think you have thrown them back in my face!"
"I know," she answers penitently; "that is what I wanted to explain to you. In point of
      fact," no longer blushing, but looking at him directly with her honest eyes, "I am not used to
      them!"
"Not used to civil speeches?" repeats he, in an accent of the most profound astonishment; he
      who when in her company is in a continual state of biting his own tongue out to prevent it
      from breaking into extravagant laudations; and who cannot but believe that all other created
      things are labouring under the same difficulty with himself!
She shakes her head.
"No; I am not. I suppose," looking reflectively at the flower-lipped brook, "that it is an
      unusual case; I think it must be owing to my forbidding manner!"
"Then why, in Heaven's name, have you a forbidding manner?" asks he in a sort of involuntary
      passion of wonder.
Even he cannot altogether deny the
       fact; and yet it seems so coarsely inconsistent with everything else about her.
      A forbidding manner with that throat, and those ears, and that nape to her neck! Her hair is
      dressed rather high in the French fashion, and she often turns her back upon him, so that he
      has a good view of it.
"Why have I a short nose?" replies she, with a good-humoured shrug; "you might just as well
      ask me that! It is a misfortune with which I was born."
But as he makes no light rejoinder— poor fellow! he is beyond it, up to his neck in the
      hopeless dulness of a serious passion—only enveloping her with the smothered flame of his
      silent looks, she grows shy and grave again.
"It is a bonâ-fide misfortune," she says, slightly shaking her head; "I have no
      wish to be forbidding. I think in my heart I am quite as anxious to please as anyone else can
      be. I will even own," with a brief, nervous smile, "that I should like whenever I entered a
      room to hear a buzz of
       admiration run round it! No, no!" suddenly changing her tone and stretching out
      both hands forbiddingly towards him; "do not try to say that I might now; if you do, I shall
      go back to the mill at once!"
"It would hardly be worth while," replies he drily; "you might put up with my clumsy
      compliments this once—by-the-bye, as it happens, I was not thinking of paying you one
      then—since it is, as you say, the last time!"
She has reddened painfully at the idea of having sought to avert a flattery which, after
      all, was not coming; but she tries to carry it off lightly.
"Perhaps it may not be the last," she says cheerfully; "we have always one resource left; we
      can ask Miss Watson to chaperon us. I never knew her refuse to go anywhere, at any time, with
      anybody, and she never has any previous engagement."
He laughs, but adds quickly with reflective seriousness:

"She would be better than nothing."
"She would be able, too," says Belinda, idly rolling her open parasol to and fro along the
      narrow path in front of her, and smiling rather consciously at her own thoughts—"she would be
      able, too, to repair any omission she may have made in the catechism she put you through the
      other day. She might ask you a few more home questions as to your ancestors and your social
      standing, etc."
"I am sure she is very welcome," answers the boy straighforwardly; "the only thing that I am
      afraid of, for her sake, is that she has already pumped me nearly drys! I think I have told
      her everything. What did I tell her—that I have just left Oxbridge?"
Belinda shakes her head.
"No, you did not tell her that; because if you had she would certainly have asked you at
      once if you had not been ploughed, or if you were quite sure that you had not been
      expelled!"
"That we live in Yorkshire?" continues
       he, aiding memory by lifting a hand to his forehead; "that there are six of us?
      and that my father is an ironmaster?"
"An ironmaster!" repeats Belinda, suddenly discontinuing her idle fidgeting with her
      sunshade, and looking up with great animation. "No; you certainly did not tell her that; an
      ironmaster, is he?"
There is such obvious surprise and pleasure in her tone that Rivers looks at her with some
      astonishment.
"Yes," he answers, "an ironmaster. Why, what did you think he was?"
But this is a question to which it is of course quite impossible that she can truly respond.
      How can she unfold to him Sarah's degrading supposition, nor her own relief at learning to
      what an eminently respectable branch of commerce his family belongs? An ironmaster, indeed!
      Why, it is the stuff of which merchant princes are made! So she only answers, with something
      of a stammer:
"Oh, I—I—of course I did not know! I had no idea!"

"It is to be hoped, for her own sake," says Rivers, raising himself from his elbow, and
      looking proud and eager, "that she will not get me upon the subject of my father, for it is a
      theme upon which I am apt to be long-winded."
"Is it?" she answers, interested, while in her heart she is calculating how soon she can
      produce to Sarah this triumphant refutation of her suspicions. Probably not before they reach
      home.
"I know that one cuts but a poor figure swaggering about one's own belongings," continues
      the young man, his love-sick air for the moment gone, and with courage and spirit in his eyes;
      "but if ever a man deserved to be looked up to, my father does!"
"Does he?" now very much interested.
"If ever a man made a plucky uphill fight of it, it was he!" Her heart feels a slight qualm.
       Uphill ! it is clear, then, that he rose from the ranks. "To begin with, he started
      in life without a penny!" The qualm grows sicker. He is going to
       tell her that his admirable father swept out the warehouse! Well, recovering
      herself, very creditable of him if he did, and Sarah need never know. "My grandfather had got
      through most of his money racing," pursues Rivers innocently. Her spirits run up like
      quicksilver. Though there is undoubtedly greater moral culpability in squandering your
      children's heritage in horse-racing than in earning them an honest livelihood with a besom,
      yet, such is the force of habit and association, Belinda is relieved that her lover's
      grandfather apparently did the one and left undone the other. "And so father had nothing in
      the world but his younger son's share of my grandmother's fortune to look to; but he gave that
      up at once to the others, and faced the world without a stiver! You may think whether he had
      to put his shoulder to the wheel! For years he worked like a—like a navvy. Poor dear old boy!
      when I think of what his youth was, and what mine is!"
He breaks off in genuine emotion, eyes
       kindling and hot colour rising. And Belinda, lovingly thinking how well such
      generous enthusiasm becomes him, keeps a sympathetic silence.
"And now," continues Rivers, sighing— "now that we hoped he had got into smooth water, and
      might take breath and enjoy his life a little, comes this depression in iron; but," his
      diffidence rushing back in floods upon him at the thought of how he has been teasing with his
      egotism his dear Lady Disdain, "I do not know why I should bother you with all this!"
"I do not know why you should not," she answers softly.
If only she could always speak in that tone! At seeing her thus gentle, approachable,
      humane, all his splendid hopes seem suddenly set within his reach. Would not he be a poltroon
      who deserved to lose them for ever if he did not now stretch out a hand to grasp them?
"I hope," he says, not daring to look fully at her, and covertly, unknown to her, touching
      an outlying ribbon of her gown
       to give himself courage—"I hope," trembling exceedingly, "that some day you will
      know my father."
"Do you?" she answers curtly.
Instantly she has frozen up again. Her heart is beating even faster than his. Eager as he
      may be to make her known to whatever is nearest and dearest to him on earth, he cannot be more
      eager than she is to be made known; but her repellent voice and her chill face—in reality the
      outcome of a fierce shyness which she can no more master than she can control the course of
      her blood—give him to infer that in his last speech he has outstepped the bounds set him by
      her.
For a moment he keeps a hot, humiliated silence. Then, reflecting that he is but a dastard
      who can be beaten back from his heart's desire by one rebuff; taking comfort, too, from what
      she had lately told him as to her own shortcomings in manner, he plucks up courage for one
      more effort.
"I should like," he says—but he has
       involuntarily moved half a pace further away from her, and in his tone there is
      less heartiness and more misgiving than before—"I should like you, of course, to know all my
      people."
"Should you?" she answers drily; the very effort to steady it, the potency of the emotion
      which dominates her, making her voice hard and surly; and with a discouraging stiff laugh: "I
      am afraid it is not very likely!"
There is a dead silence. For to-day there is no more fear of his transgressing her limits.
      He sits looking blankly at the brook. If, in the crises of foolish men's and women's lives
      there were but a go- between to interpret! But there never is!
For full five minutes the river loudly runs, and the finches piercingly sing, without any
      human noise to break in upon their concert. At last Belinda, who has been snatching remorseful
      glances at the severe melancholy of her sweetheart's profile, hazards a timid
      propitiation:

"Have you many sisters?" she asks conciliatingly.
"Two," he answers shortly, looking straight before him; "but," with a spurious smile, "I
      have inflicted enough of my family upon you for one day."
She is too much wounded to make any rejoinder, and the conversation, which before had flown
      as glibly as the stream or as the lark's roulades, drops into silence again. At their feet the
      rock-shadows couch. The sun's rays, no longer vertical, blaze obliquely upon the water and
      upon the sunlike dandelion flowers.
"It must be late," says Belinda reluctantly, her eyes turning from the hurrying sparkles of
      the beck to consult his face; "had we better be going back?"
She had hoped for an earnest protest from him, a supplication for yet a few moments more of
      their bright solitude. But none such comes! He makes no sort of objection; but, on the
      contrary, rises at once, and stands ready to attend her; and silently they return to the
      mill.

</div></body></text></TEI>