<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAPTER II.
She says the same thing to herself in the solitude of her own room —that solitude
      where the least truthful speaks truth. She says it again when she awakes next morning. Is it
      possible that an avenue to renewed interest in life may be opening before her? Others
      —Professor Forth, for instance—have lived and live by the intellect; live to all appearance
      worthily and contentedly. Why may not she too? What—her heart being stone-dead—is there to
      prevent her?
"If you please, 'm," says Tommy next day in the afternoon, appearing in the doorway of the
      little back sitting-room, litter-room, dirt-hole, where a special
       cause has gathered the three ladies of the Churchill family, "there is a
      gentleman from Higgins and Rawson in the hall."
It is a new Tommy; the old one, having bloomed out into increased size and new vices, has
      been superseded; a new Tommy with a cherub face, but an education for his profession that as
      yet leaves much to be desired.
"A gentleman from Higgins and Rawson!" repeats Mrs. Churchill indignantly; "there
      are no gentlemen at Higgins and Rawson's—it is a haberdasher's shop! Ask him his
      business."
The cherub retires, trembling, and his mistress's attention returns to the object from which
      his entrance had diverted it; the object which has called both herself and her granddaughters
      hither. It is the washing of the dogs, a function periodically celebrated and revelled in by
      Sarah.
Jane is already washed; she is a pushing dog, always putting herself forward, and claiming
      the chief seats in the synagogues. Candescently white, cleansed from
       stain of indigo and ochre, no longer comic, but gravely beautiful, she lies in
      glory, drying on a blanket. It is now the martyred Slutty who is in the wash-tub, dripping
      resignedly, while Sarah's strong white arm is employed in vigorously scrubbing her fat back,
      and the soapsuds are falling into her dreadfully goggling eyes.
Punch is seated in a deep dejection not usual with him a good distance off, well aware that
      his fate also is hurrying to over- take him, but trying to imagine that he may avoid it by
      remaining seated in the middle distance, and totally refusing to reply when addressed.
Belinda sits by, occasionally lending a helping hand when Slutty struggles, and occasionally
      turning a page of the volume of Browning, which, in pursuance of her intention of living
      henceforth by the intellect, lies open on her knees.
Tommy has again appeared.
"If you please, 'm, there is a lady with a tambourine—"

"A lady with a tambourine!" repeats Mrs. Churchill, in an awful voice. "What do you
      mean, Tommy? Ladies do not play tambourines about the streets! You mean a woman with
      a tambourine! Send her away."
A second time Tommy retires discomfited, but not for long. After a short absence he
      returns.
"If you please, 'm, there is a person in the hall wishes to speak to you."
"A person!" echoes Mrs. Churchill commendingly. "Come, that is better! A shopman, I suppose!
      Did he say what shop had sent him?"
"Please, 'm, I do not think he is a gentleman from—I do not think he is from a shop at all.
      He said his name was Forth, and asked me to give you this card" (presenting one).
As her eyes fall upon it, Mrs. Churchill jumps up with a little shriek.
"Good Heavens!" she cries, aghast, "it is Professor Forth! What do you mean, Tommy, by
      calling him a 'person,' and
       leaving him in the hall? Show him up to the drawing-room at once!"
"Please, 'm," replies Tommy, whimpering, "you said as how I was not to call 'em
      gentlemen."
"So he has come!" cries Sarah, in a rather triumphant voice, raising a beaming face from the
      middle of the steam and suds. "Do not you think he would like to see the dogs washed?"
"I cannot think what has brought him," says Mrs. Churchill, in a vexed voice; "that class of
      people has no tact. I never could find a word to say to him. Now, pray, Sarah, do not make a
      fool of him again! It is all very well for you, but you do not reflect what a nuisance he is
      to Belinda and me!"
"He is no nuisance to me!" replies Belinda coldly; "I am glad he has come. I wanted to talk
      to him! I do not think he has come to see Sarah; I think he has come to see me!"
She says it with cool, positive, indifferent composure. With as much coolness, as
       much indifference, as much composure, she walks up the stairs and into the
      drawing- room, pursued by her sister's message:
"Tell him that I am coming directly, but that, with me, even Love cedes to Duty, and I must
      finish washing Slutty."
Mr. Forth is looking towards the door as Belinda enters; and an indescribable air of relief
      steals over his countenance when he perceives that she is alone.
"I have taken the liberty of calling," he begins formally; but she interrupts him.
"I am glad to see you," she says, with a direct look of cold sincerity. "I wanted to talk to
      you. Will you sit down?"
And yet, now that the opportunity for gratifying that want has come, she seems for a while
      to lack the power.
According to his chilly wont, he has chosen the seat nearest the fire, opposite the window,
      and she has placed herself on the other side. As she looks in his face, a cataract of
      agonizing memories pours storming over her heart. In the throng and bustle of last night,
      memory had not
       been half so busy. She had thought that she could see him without pain; with
      only that dull numbness with which she sees small and great. But now she finds that for her in
      each wrinkle traced by thought about his eyes—in each pucker of discontent around his
      lips—there lurks a demon of recollection.
The little wintry, fog-thickened London drawing-room has changed to the sunny Dresden salon.
      It is full again of Sarah's pungent pleasantries at her lover's cost, and of Rivers'
      resounding laughs at them. A hundred worthless speeches of Rivers', ridiculing the other's
      foibles, his muffetees, his parsimony, his digestion—speeches trivial and merry when spoken,
      now solemn and woful—rush back upon her mind. Oh, if her heart should turn out not to be
      stone-dead after all! But it must!—it must!—it shall!
Her silence has lasted longer than she is aware, and there is a slight tone of offence—to
      that, too, a memory is tied— in her visitor's voice, as he says:

"I hope I have not chosen an inopportune moment for my visit?"
"Not at all! not at all!" she answers hastily; but the composure with which she had entered
      the room, had first addressed him, is gone; a fever has come into her cheek, and a hurry into
      her words. "As I told you, I am glad to see you. I want to talk to you. Why have not you gone
      back to Oxbridge?"
"I am to return by the 4.45 train," he replies; "and I thought that I could not better
      utilize the moments left me than by—"
"Yes, yes, I understand," she cries, brusquely pushing aside his civilities. "I want to ask
      you—I want you to tell me— I suppose that you are a competent judge —is not it quite possible
      for a person to live entirely by the intellect?"
He looks at her doubtfully. Such a question in the mouth of a Churchill his experience of
      Sarah has taught him profoundly to distrust.
"I mean," she says, nervously plucking
       at the Japanese hand-screen that she has taken up to shade her face—hot, but not
      with fire heat—"I mean," panting a little, "do not you think that that is the best life—the
      most satisfactory on the whole— the least liable to interruption and disappointment —that is
      built upon—upon— books, you know—upon the—the mind!"
"You must be aware," he answers frigidly, "that the whole tendency of my teaching is to show
      that the pursuit of knowledge is the only one that really and abundantly rewards the labour
      bestowed upon it."
"You think so?" she answers breathlessly, leaning eagerly forward, and fixing her large
      heart-hungry eyes upon him. "You think that it would be enough —that it would satisfy
      one—that one would not need anything beyond?"
There is an inexpressibly sorrowful yearning in the accent with which she pronounces this
      last phrase. Oh, if he could but furnish her with this anodyne, how she would fall on her
      knees and bless him!

"Since there is no limit to the domain of the knowable," he is beginning, when again she
      breaks in upon him:
"No, no! of course not! I understand! But how to get at it, that is the question! I
      thought—I imagined—I hoped—that perhaps you might help me—might direct me!"
Again he looks at her suspiciously. Is not this the very same request with which the
      mendacious Sarah had opened her fire upon him? Is this a thirst for learning of the same
      character, and that is likely to be quenched with the same surprising ease?
"Of course," she goes on hastily, mistaking the source of his hesitation, "I cannot expect
      you to waste much time upon me; but I thought that—that— perhaps, you might be inclined to set
      me on the way; to—to—lend me a book or two every now and then."
"I am not in the habit of lending books," he answers, still suspiciously; "but I should be
      happy to make an exception in your
       favour, were I convinced that your desire for self-education were a genuine
      one."
"Genuine!" she cries, indignant and astonished. "Why, what else should it be? What motive
      could I have for feigning it?"
A slight look of embarrassment, mixed with mortification, crosses his face.
"You cannot have forgotten," he says, "the interest in literature counterfeited by your
      sister—"
He stops suddenly; for, as if the mention of her had conjured up her bodily presence, at the
      same instant she enters, protected by her grandmother and by a tempest of clean dogs.
"How are you?" cries she, holding out her hand to him with the same easy, jovial smile as if
      they had parted yesterday on the best of terms. No confusion born of the recollection of their
      last meeting troubles her good-humour. No doubt as to the present visit being addressed to her
      ruffles her mind. None such apparently results from the precipitancy with which,
       upon her entry, her ex-lover begins to seek his hat, and murmur of his
      train.
"And about the books?" says Belinda, with a hesitating wistfulness when her turn comes to be
      bidden good-bye to. "You will not forget about the books?"
It seems to her as if he were carrying off her new, faint, feverish hope with him, and she
      cannot let it go without a struggle.
"I will think of it," he answers hurriedly, with a distrustful glance at Sarah; "I—I will
      let you know."
"What about books?" asks Sarah inquisitively, as soon as the door has closed upon him. "Is
      he going to lend you books? The old villain! it was with books that he first beguiled my young
      affections. I believe that he is like Jacob: not having been able to obtain Rachel, he is
      going to try and put up with Leah! eh, Leah?"
"What an untidy way he has of sitting!" says Mrs. Churchill pettishly, advancing to set
      right the chair lately occupied by their guest; "these loose chair-covers are a
       mistake. I am sure I hope that he will be in no hurry to repeat his visit. One
      thing is certain; not one of us expressed the slightest wish to see him again!"
"If I did not express it, I felt it," answers Belinda perversely. "I wish to see him
      again."
Mrs. Churchill's sole response is a silent shrug, a mode lately adopted by her and Sarah of
      receiving the starts and frets of Belinda's temper—that temper once so smooth and sweet—a mode
      of expressing that they are to be endured, not argued with.
"How curiously ugly he is!" cries Sarah, chuckling at the recollection. "I could hardly help
      laughing when I looked at him. He is like Charles Lamb's Mrs. Conrady: 'No one ever saw Mrs.
      Conrady without pronouncing her to be the plainest woman that he ever met with in the course
      of his life. The first time that you are indulged with a sight of her face is an era in your
      existence ever after. You are glad to have seen it—like Stonehenge!' "

Mrs. Churchill laughs lazily. "What a memory you have, child!"
"I can go on, if you like," continues Sarah, encouraged by this praise. "'No one can pretend
      to forget it. No one ever apologized to her for meeting her in the street on such a day and
      not knowing her; the pretext would be too bare."'
"You have always grossly underrated him," says Belinda severely; "there is a side of him, an
      intellectual side, which you are totally incapable of appreciating!"
"Totally!" assents her sister placidly; "and so, I hoped, were you!"
"At least I know that it is there!" cries Belinda angrily, beginning to walk restlessly
      about the room after a fashion that she has adopted during the last year—a fashion that is
      somewhat trying to her housemates' patience. "I recognize it; I admit it; I would imitate it
      if I could!"
"Since when?" asks Sarah drily.
There is something in her apparently harmless question which jars upon Belinda's sick
      nerves.

"It is very hard," she breaks out, reddening, "that one should be thrown back and ridiculed
      here, when one makes any least effort to improve one's self! What is the use of making any
      attempt in such an atmosphere as this? What is the use of struggling—of trying—"
She bursts into stormy tears, and leaves the room.
"Her temper is becoming impossible!" exclaims Mrs. Churchill, holding up her pretty, old
      white hands.
But Sarah only says, "Poor dear!" in a very lenient voice, and kisses all the dogs.
</div></body></text></TEI>