<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="40">
CHAPTER VI.

"Look up! There is a small bright cloud
   Alone amid the skies;
So high, so pure, and so apart,
   A woman's honour lies."
And now the night has to be faced. With what dread has she watched the slow
      declension of the summer evening; but no dread comes up to the reality, to the miserable
      endless hours of hand-to-hand fighting with the terrible battalions of thought and remorses,
      that come up, ever fresh and fresh, against her; that, while all around her are softly
      sleeping, take her by the throat in the blackness, and will not let
       her go. To no dream or nightmare, indeed, does she give the opportunity to
      torment her, for she makes no attempt to sleep. Fully dressed, widely, burningly awake, she
      sits all night writing, writing, writing endless letters of farewell to him, who, parted from
      her only by a flimsy lath-and-plaster partition, lies tossing in the light and uneasy dozes of
      old age. How many does she write? They must be a score, at least; prayers for forgiveness,
      cries of remorse; and no sooner are they written than she tears them all. Prayers for
      forgiveness of a wrong that is unforgivable! Cries of remorse for a sin that her action shows
      she has not really repented of! Why insult him by such? The dawn has come by the time that she
      has at length written the three lines which, without reading over—if she read them over, she
      knows that she would tear them too—she feverishly folds and places in an envelope. In them
      there is neither petition nor repentance.

"I am going to leave you for always. You cannot think that I have been a worse wife to you
      than I think myself.
" Belinda ."
To have toiled all night for such an outcome! She walks to the window, feeling stiff and
      chilled. The morning is bringing all night's secrets to light. Again the wooded hill rises a
      hand-breadth off; the little patch of sky that it allows her to see is putting on day's blue
      livery.
Well, then, it has come! There is no going back now! no more shilly-shallying! There is
      nothing for it but to make the best of it! She has turned from the window, and accidentally
      faced herself in the glass. What a spectacle! What heavy smouches under the eyes! What baked
      white lips! But in her face, is there something else, too? something new and unqualifiable? Is
      it already beginning to assume that pitiful, brazen look, that women such as she wear? Well,
      if it is,
       what wonder? If it is, there is no help for it!
The time is so short—so short now! Surely for that short time she can manage to keep thought
      at bay? She moves noiselessly about, busying herself with this and that. She takes off her
      wedding-ring, and making it and the few paltry trinkets that her husband has ever given her
      into a small packet, directs and places them beside the letter; then she tries to ruffle her
      bed, and give it a lately occupied air: no easy task, for a bed that has not been slept in
       will not look like one that has. Then she undresses; and by-and-by, when her hot
      water is brought, makes her toilet afresh, having first placed letter and parcel in a
      conspicuous situation upon the chest of drawers which serves as dressing-table, and goes
      downstairs.
How near the time is now! She refers, for the hundredth time, to the paper of directions
      left with her by Rivers. At such an hour she is to set off. It is within
       five minutes of that hour. She has ordered over-night a carriage to convey her.
      It is true that an omnibus plies between hotel and station, but from its publicity she shrinks
      with unconquerable aversion. It will be full of people. They will be talking and laughing.
      They will talk to her; perhaps—quite as likely as not—they will ask her where she is
      going!
So she has ordered an open fly for herself. It shall be no expense to Professor Forth. She
      can easily return him by post the money for it. Yes; but whose money? A scorching
      blush burns cheek and brow, and she covers her miserable face with her hands.
It is three minutes past the appointed hour, and the carriage is not yet here. Perhaps there
      has been some mistake! Perhaps it was never ordered! But no sooner has this sickly hope—that
      is scarcely a hope either—flared up in her mind, than it is extinguished again. For an open
      fly comes rolling briskly up to the door. Perhaps
       it may not be hers. Other people order flys too. Perhaps it may be for some one
      else. But this delusion also dies.
"The carriage is ready, ma'am," says a waiter, approaching her.
"Are you sure that it is mine?" she asks huskily. "Are you sure that it is not meant for
      some one else—that there is no mistake?"
"No mistake at all, ma'am!"
There is nothing for it but to get in. As she takes her seat:
"Will you dine at the table d'hôte to-day, ma'am?" asks the waiter innocently.
In an instant all the truant blood has poured back into her snow-white face. Does he suspect
      her? Has he asked her on purpose?
"No!" she answers almost inaudibly— "no, not to-day."
And now she is off! The die is cast! Nothing has happened to prevent her.
       To the last moment she has dimly believed that something would happen to prevent
      her. But no! nothing has! No fire has fallen from heaven to consume her! No accident has
      occurred to hinder her! By what small accidents—happening at the last moment—have other people
      been saved! No accident comes to save her! Neither God nor man cares what becomes of
       her!
The morning is lovely, with morning's fresh look of newness, as if the ancient hills had but
      just been turned out of their Maker's workshop. Lapis-blue is the lake, as a summer lake
      should be; and with its little islands laughing in summer forest-green upon its radiant lap.
      Over one mountain shoulder, indeed, a few slight cloud-shadows, thrown light as gauzy scarves,
      still lie. But on his brothers' granite knees there is strong resolute sunshine, and in their
      ravines shadows cut hard and black.
Oh, cruel world! Again you are jeering
       her with you beauty! Her eyes roll wildly round, and thought after thought
      courses with mad rapidity through her head. Little irrelevant incidents out of far-away
      childhood, fragments of forgotten books, texts of Scripture. "I will look unto the hills from
      whence cometh my help!" That is what teases her most. And yet what applicability is there in
      it to her? Does any help come from the hills to her? Beneath the trees that lip the lake, and
      through whose leafage come ever glimpses of its dazzling gaiety, the sweet road winds. Along
      it some of the inmates of the hotel are leisurely walking, and, as she passes, look up to nod
      and smile at her.
Would they nod and smile at her did they know whither and on what errand she is bent? What
      right has she to leave them under such a delusion? She must undeceive them. So distraught is
      her brain that she leans out of the carriage to accomplish this lunatic purpose, but
       they are already left behind. How fast the driver drives!
Why does he drive so fast? She calls out to him to go slower; and then, with a new and
      contradictory longing that it should be over, should be irrevocable, bids him drive faster
      again. And still, numberless as sand-grains, quicker than lightning, the thoughts rush through
      her head. It is a sentence out of "Sartor Resartus" now that is beating and hammering in her
      brain; a "Sartor Resartus" casually left behind by some stray guest at the hotel, and as
      casually opened by her yesterday. "Love not Pleasure; Love God: This is the Everlasting Yea!"
      Why should it buzz in her ears? What has it to say to her? How short the
      drive is! The roofs of Keswick are already in sight. That was a short drive, too—the drive to
      church on her marriage morning. With what dreadful vividness does it now return in each detail
      of its pinched and icy misery upon her memory; she sitting there in
       dead despairing obstinacy, and Sarah sobbing beside her, telling her that it was
      not too late! Sarah was right. It was not too late then. If Sarah were here now, would she
      still tell her that it is not too late? Oh, why is not she here then? At every step of the
      road her agony heightens, and a cold sweat stands on her forehead. It is not too late! It
       is not too late! This is written in letters of fire all over the mountains; all over the
      lapis lake and sapphire sky. It is not too late! How plainly she can read the words!
      They are taking the character of a command! It is not too late! Dare she disobey such
      a mandate?
"Stop!" she cries, standing up suddenly, like one possessed. But her emotion is so
      overpowering, and her throat so dry, that no sound issues from it. The horse still trots
      rapidly on. " Stop !" she repeats, but once again her disobedient organs play her
      false, and the horse trots on. " Stop !" she cries frantically, a third time; and
      now, at
       last, the coachman hears, and pulls up. "Go back!" she says hoarsely, and almost
      unintelligibly; "go back to the hotel!" then, becoming aware, though sight is dim and head
      giddy, of the unbounded astonishment depicted on his face—"I—I—have forgotten something!"
"We shall lose the train, ma'am," he answers, civilly demurring; "we have not too much time
      as it is."
"Go back!" she repeats, huskily; and then, indeed, wondering, he obeys.
She sinks back, and covers her face with her hands. What has she done? She forbids herself
      to ask or think. But has she done it in vain? If, during her absence, her letter has been
      discovered, she will have returned in vain. Even if it has not been already discovered, every
      minute that passes lessens its chance of escape. At this very moment it may be being found,
      and she will have turned back in vain.
"How slow you drive!" she cries harshly; "drive quicker! quicker!"

How could she ever have thought the distance short? It is immeasurably, unbelievably long!
      The hotel is in sight! A few people are standing about the door. Have they heard? Are they
      talking about it? The fly has stopped. Is she in time? It seems as if there were an ominous
      silence about the idlers hanging round. Have they heard? She dare not look the waiter, who
      comes to help her out, in the face. She staggers past him into the hall; then, by a tremendous
      effort, steadying herself, she rushes upstairs. Is she in time? Flight after flight she
      mounts, with that question surging in her ears. She has reached her room—has burst into it. Is
      she in time? One glance gives her the answer. Yes, she is! Undisturbed, exactly as she had
      left them upon the top of the chest of drawers, lie letter and packet. She is in
      time! Oh, the relief of that thought! And yet, so complicatedly contradictory are we, that, at
      the sight so madly desired, a distinct pang of disappointment
       crosses her heart. Had the letter been discovered, there would have been the one
      and only refuge left her, and no one could then have blamed her for availing herself
      of it. She starts, shuddering at herself. Is she already repenting of her repentance? What
      security has she that she may not again go back from it? Within her there is none; if there
       is a security for her, it must be one outside her. She has taken the letter into her
      hand, and stands for a few moments motionless; a desperate determination gaining strength in
      her heart, and painting itself on her haggard yet resolute face. Since the letter has not yet
      been delivered to him, she herself will deliver it. She will tell him under what circumstances
      it was written. This shall be her expiation.
Without giving herself time for hesitation, she moves quickly out of the room, and knocks at
      her husband's door. There is no answer, and she knocks again. Still no
       reply. Perhaps, though it is not likely, he may be out. So she enters. No, he is
      in his usual seat, by his improvised writing-table. He could not have heard. His attitude is
      not quite his usual one, for he is apparently unoccupied, leaning back in his chair, and with
      his head bent a little forwards on his chest. He must be thinking, and will probably chide her
      for disturbing him. Well, it cannot be helped. Heaven knows he has cause enough to chide
      her!
"Can I speak to you?"
Her voice sounds strangely resonant in this silent room. There is no answer, nor does her
      husband show, by any movement or slightest change of position, that he is aware of her
      vicinity. It is very odd. She has spoken loudly and distinctly, and he is not deaf. He must be
      asleep; and yet, he is not apt to fall asleep in the morning! A chill terror is creeping over
      her, but she tries to shake it off. Her nerves are unstrung. Why should not he
       be asleep? How apt old people are to slide into a doze.
Conquering the nameless, senseless dread of approaching him that has come over her, she
      walks firmly up to him, and laying her hand on his arm, stoops and looks into his face. The
      next instant a sharp shriek rings through the hotel, and when frightened visitors and
      chamber-maids, hurrying from all quarters, reach the room, they find Mrs. Forth lying
      stretched on the floor beside her husband, as inanimate as he. Only that in time they bring
       her round again. As for him, he has for ever vindicated his character from the
      imputation of being a malade imaginaire , and the Professorship of Etruscan in the
      University of Oxbridge is vacant!
FINIS.
</div></body></text></TEI>