<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="33">
CHAPTER X.

"How sad and bad and mad it was!
But then, how it was sweet!"
The Professor has been gone a parson's week. For the same period of time Mrs. Forth
      has been testing the genuineness of her appetite for solitude; nor finding it fail beneath the
      experiment. Perhaps it is the extreme clearness of her conscience that upholds her; for do not
      we all know, either by its possession or its lack, that there is no cheerfuller companion than
      a clear conscience? nothing that gives such a zest to appetite, or such a point to occupation?
      And can anyone be in fuller possession
       of this innocent luxury than Belinda? Has not she craved with meek persistency
      leave to share her husband's travels? and, reluctantly compelled to abandon this hope, has not
      she provided, with wifely care, for every possible need that may assail him on that sanitary
      excursion, for whose loneliness none can blame her ?
Did she forget his Etna? or his eider down? or his air-cushion? Did she, as many a spouse
      though otherwise meritorious might easily have done, omit his tin of digestive biscuits? Was
      there lacking from his kit at his departure one of his heart drops, liver pills, spleen
      boluses?
What but the consciousness of a duty performed both generously and minutely could enable her
      to wave her hand at the fly-window with so collected a friendliness; smile such a serene "
       Bon voyage " to the jewel of which that fly is the casket? To assume an inconsolable
      grief would be
       absurd, and would take him in even less than herself; but there is no hypocrisy
      in crying, "A good journey to you!"
As she returns up the gravelled drive, she stoops to pick up a small stone. How brightly it
      shines!
"Is it a strayed agate or beryl?"
"Pooh!" (throwing it down again), "it is only a pebble; it is only the late shower and the
      present sun that have turned it into a temporary gem."
But the same rich metamorphosis seems to have taken place in the case of every object upon
      which her eye alights. Did ever bountiful rose-tree show such a wealth of come flowers and
      coming buds, as the "Captain Christy" against the study wall? Was ever little Philistine
      drawing-room so rich in gold motes lustily astride on the sunbeams? Even the very dogs, the
      well-known dogs, seem to wear an air of better breeding; manners of higher finish; tails of
      more watchspring curl than on any previous morning. Even the parrot's profanities
       —in point of fact, very common-places of blasphemy, uttered with an Oxbridge
      accent—have won a raciness never before theirs.
She wanders from room to room, as it were taking possession. Are not they all her own, her
      very own now? Even without the explanation to that effect, which in pure wantonness of spirits
      she has vouchsafed separately to Punch and Slutty, they seem perfectly to understand that they
      are now at libetty to rumple the chair-covers, clatter down the fire-irons, oppress the cats
      as freely as their soul listeth; that there are no longer any nerves in the house, any
      dyspepsia, any learning. Nor does the passage of the hours and days bring with it any sensible
      alteration in this mood, of either hers or theirs.
Daily she sees the piled vehicles rolling past to the station; carrying her fellow-townsmen
      away to their holiday; stampedes of whole large small families to the seaside (the new
      Oxbridge swarms and
       perambulates and crawls with little children, all apparently of the same age to a
      day); hardy young couples winging bold flights to the North Cape, or more modest Dolomites.
      She wishes them all a happy time and safe return; but not a twinge of envy goes with one of
      them.
Home is good enough for her; England far enough; Oxbridge fair enough. Even Sarah's parting
      words, at first so rankling with poisonous sting, grow gradually powerless to hurt. She begins
      to think of them at first with indignation, next with indifference, and at last even with a
      lofty kind of compassionate forgiveness.
"It is the speakers of such calumnious utterances," she says to herself, without conscious
      sophistry, "not those to whom they are addressed, whom they injure."
She lets her mind run with complacency round the circle of her accurately fulfilled duties.
      Is there one in a thousand who, considering the nature of those duties, would fulfil them as
      accurately? Has
       not she, in addition to the tasks imposed upon her, for fulfilment during his
      absence by her husband, voluntarily undertaken to make a new catalogue of his library, as a
      wifely surprise for him upon his return? Does she scamp, by one moment, the time of her visits
      to his mother? Has not she rather enlarged them by nearly a daily hour? Is not the nurse ready
      to lick her feet, for her consideration and unselfish sharing of that nurse's burden? Does her
      patience ever for an instant fail under the old lady's senseless catechisms? Can anything
      surpass the painstaking discretion with which she conducts the Professor's correspondence,
      left behind him, in her charge? or the respectful punctuality and amplitude of her own letters
      to him? Nor is her self-satisfaction less, when she consider her pleasures. Might not every
      member of the University, every inhabitant of the world, if he saw fit, have leave to pry into
      each moment of her leisure, as of her occupations?

The happy gardenings—weeding the border, with the dogs yawning their hearts out beside her,
      in affectionate endurance of a pastime they are so far from participating. Dogs hate
      gardening; they see no sense in it. Of what use, pray, to dig a hole, when you have no bone to
      bury in it? The long country walks to the elm-shaded rural villages, and through the late June
      fields, where man has sown his corn and God has thrown in His poppies; the return home,
      poppy-laden, to make the house one scarlet bower, though it is embellished for only her own
      eye.
Never has that eye seemed so open to see. Never has her ear seemed to be laid so close to
      the heart of the mighty mother, to hear its beatings. Never till this year had she learned all
      the music that lies even in the trumpeting gnat and the booming evening chafers. Never had she
      grown into such familiar friendship with the woodland birds. All her life, of course, she has
      known that the thrush's song is sweet, and
       the lark's exulting; but not till now—so unobservant are we—has she learned
      surely the songs of the lesser minne-singers, the minor stars of the great concert. But this
      summer, by right perhaps of her harmlessness and her solitude, she has stolen into their
      intimacy. She recognises them lovingly, not only when they sing, but when they converse among
      themselves. She knows the tomtit's table-talk—like the grating of a tiny saw; the cock
      chaffinch's —all: she grows discriminatingly cunning in all their little speech.
The dogs enjoy themselves too in their way, though they think that the flowers smell ill;
      and that the birds' noise is ugly and foolish, not to be named in the same breath with the
      poignant love-songs of the nightly cats. Slutty, indeed, has suffered one of those
      disappointments, from which not dogs any more than men are exempt. For four-and-twenty hours
      Punch has been lost; and from the more than resignation, evidenced by her during his absence,
      and
       the acute depression coincident with his restoration, it is but too clear that
      she had hoped his disappearance was a permanent one.
June nears her perfumed close. The second Sunday of Mrs. Forth's loneliness has come round.
      The first was marked by no special incident. Belinda had not expected that it would be. But,
      indeed, not even to herself does she allow that she anticipates anything for any Sunday. But
      yet, on this second Sunday she rises with such a feeling of irrepressible blithe excitement,
      that she must needs casuistically explain it to herself. The air is so good. The smell of the
      hay comes now into the middle of the town; into street and market-place; how much more hither,
      where she is in the enjoyment of a sort of suburban pseudo-country. She has ever been fond of
      Sunday. It is always a favourite day with her; much more so in this Sunday city of innumerable
      church bells.

She dresses with a resolute abstaining from adding a single adornment, or making any change,
      however slight, in her usual Sunday toilet. To do so would be to allow that she had some
      reason for the alteration. Perhaps, with this motive mingles an unconfessed superstition that
      to presuppose a pleasure by preparation for it, is the surest way to rob yourself of its
      fruition.
She reads the Lessons for the day to her mother-in-law, with as reverent a distinctness as
      if the poor old lady could follow them, or were even aware of the nature of the attention. It
      is a proceeding of whose judiciousness she herself has no great opinion; but it is one of the
      tasks imposed upon her by her husband, and which she would by no means intermit. When they are
      ended, having told her the news of her husband's death, which she receives with her usual
      pleased surprise, Belinda goes lightly away to put on her bonnet for church.
As she walks along, her memory grows
       suddenly occupied with the recollection of that other solitary walk to church at
      Folkestone; of the griding cold; the ice-bound earth; the misery of her yet more ice-bound
      heart; of the wretched prisoned starling to which she had likened herself. Not greater is
      earth's change than that which is wrought within herself. But for her change, what
      reason is there? Has the starling then escaped? The question flashes upon her with an uneasy
      start, but is instantly silenced again.
The service is one of those brief and modernized ones, that make us marvel at the patience
      of our earlier days; yet to Belinda it seems long. Whether sweetly singing, devoutly kneeling,
      or attentively listening, she has no peace from the buzzing thought—never allowed, never
      looked in the face—but always returning, gnat-like: "When will it be? Where will it be? How
      long will it last?" It does not leave her at the church door, but buzzes and teases all along
      the sunshiny road. It will
       buzz and tease until it gets its answer. Well, let it! For is not that answer now
      given?
At the turn of the road, close at home, free from the stream of churchgoers, which has
      flowed in other directions, with no more witness than a milkman swinging unconcernedly along
      beneath his yoke, there it will be—there it is! Has not every moment since their parting been
      but a leading up to and preparation for this moment? And yet, at the sight of him she starts,
      as if it were a surprise, which indeed she still feigns to herself that it is.
" You here?" she says in a voice of airy astonishment, that would be admirably
      natural did it not quiver, and were it not a little overdone. "Have you fallen from the
      clouds?"
His answer is not over-ready. He has not yet got over the stupefaction that the first sight
      of her after an interval always brings upon him—a stupefaction such as, they say, the sight of
      the sea, of
       Niagara, of any overwhelmingly great and noble natural object, produces in him
      who looks upon it for the first time. How much more beautiful she is than he had remembered
      her! how pious she looks! how chaste! Probably other women before now have carried large
      Prayer-books, and "Ancient and Modern Hymn-books" in their left hand, home from church; but it
      seems to him to be a wondrous feat of grace and holiness, performed for the first and only
      time in the world's history. At last:
"Are you surprised?" he asks, still feeling rather dizzy; "if you remember—"
"I am afraid that you will find all your friends gone down," she interrupts
      precipitately.
"Shall I?" he answers, with an indifference that he makes no attempt to conceal; "probably,
      no doubt."
Is it her large Prayer-book that is making her so unapproachable?
"Have you come from Yorkshire?" she asks quickly, not allowing a moment of
       silence to intervene, with the uneasy idea, probably, of keeping the
      conversation in the polite and distant society key in which she has elected to pitch it.
"Yes."
"Did not you find it very dusty travelling?" walking fast, and looking straight before
      her.
"I came by a night-train."
"Do you like night-travelling? I do not; but then I can't sleep. Perhaps you can
      sleep?"
"I did not sleep!"
There is a tinge of reproach in the manner in which he pronounces the last words. What has
      happened to her? Is it to hear these cold platitudes that he has been rushing towards her all
      through the night, chiding the iron wheels for being slow—that he has spent his holiday, and
      foregone his rest? Sleep! With this to-day —this now ahead of him!
      Is it likely that he should sleep?
They have reached her gate, and there
       paused. She does not ask him to accompany her in, nor does she make him any
      hospitable offer whatever. But that he has neither expected nor wished— would have declined on
      the unlikely hypothesis of her offering it. He has no desire to taste of Professor Forth's
      salt. There is something that tells him that her pause before dismissing him will be only a
      momentary one; and that if he does not utilize this very present instant, she will be gone,
      and he may return to Milnthorpe, whence he came, at his leisure.
"You will enjoy the country air after your Milnthorpe smoke," she says, her hand upon the
      latch, and with what he knows to be a valedictory smile.
"What do you do on Sunday afternoons?" he asks precipitately; "do you do anything?"
" Do anything! " she repeats, demurring; "what do you mean?"
"Do you go to church again?" very hurriedly, and doubling up his hands in his
       pockets to hinder their yielding to their almost ungovernable impulse to stretch
      themselves out, and—with her will, or against her will—there detain her.
She casts a furtive glance towards the house—a glance that makes in him the fear of her
      flight, and the impulse to check it, yet more nearly beyond his governance.
"No—o," she says slowly; "not often."
"What do you do then? Do you ever take a walk?"
He has his eye upon her. Would it be quite inadmissible, if she shows symptoms of leaving
      him unanswered, to lay one hand quite quietly, so that she should be scarcely conscious of it,
      upon her arm? There is a full minute—sixty seconds well rung—before she answers.
"Sometimes, as it happens, if it does not rain—if I feel inclined."
"And—and—have you any—any specially favourite walk?"
Again she looks towards the house, behind whose closed doors the dogs are
       plainly heard, telling her that they know she has come back from church, and
      asking her why she is dawdling.
"No; none!" she says, lifting the latch. "Of course," her words coming with a sort of
      shamefaced hurry, "I like the College gardens—everybody must like the College gardens; but,"
      with a sudden remorse at this concession, "I very often do not go there, because of the dogs;
      one may not take the dogs into them."
She has opened the gate, and is passing through it. He has only half a minute left.
"Which is your favourite? Which do you like best?" he cries desperately after her.
"I have not any favourite. I do not know; I like them all."
She has taken out her latch-key, and is putting it into the lock.
"That means that you are determined not to tell me," he says, with a tremor of passionate
      disappointment in his voice;
       and so, taking off his hat, turns on his heel. But as he walks slowly down the
      road, telling his own heart that he has befooled himself—never would he allow that his high
      lady could befool him—a sort of whisper seems to travel to his ears, "Some people like St.
      Bridget's best!"

Belinda lunches, as usual, alone. The one prime and perhaps sole advantage of solitary
      feeding is, that you need not eat more than you feel inclined; that if from any cause your
      appetite has left you, there is no one to make comments on that fact. If, in addition, you
      have two pet gluttons on their hind-legs supporting you throughout your repast on either side,
      and drawing five sharp nails along the back of your hand if you do not seem to be attending to
      them, not even to the servant need your condition of un-hunger be ever revealed.
Punch and Slutty have never yet understood
       why, on that June Sunday, they were feasted so royally on ribs of roast
      beef.
From the luncheon-table Belinda passes, according to the usual routine of her duties, to her
      mother-in-law's room, for her daily two hours. As it turns out, they are more than two; for
      the nurse, relying upon her employer's usual good-natured laxity, outstays her furlough by
      fully twenty minutes, and returns to find young Mrs. Forth, for the first time, unsmiling and
      impatient of the delay. And yet, when released, she seems undecided as to the disposition of
      her time.
The dogs are staring at her—one sitting, one standing—as if they knew that their fate was
      hanging in the balance. Can anyone resist such a litany of goggles as their eyes are uttering?
      It would be a crying shame to disappoint them. She will forego the trim leisure of the College
      gardens and take them to the Fields—a public promenade where dogs are admitted, and where
      perambulators push and Sunday shop-boys
       jostle. But she does not call them or tell them so. After all, it is a pity to
      spoil them, and to let them take it for granted that they are to accompany her wherever she
      goes. On the whole, it is wiser not to hamper herself with them. She will make no fixed plan
      as to the direction of her walk; but will simply follow where whim or chance may lead. And
      whim and chance, after a little preliminary shamming, gone through to impose upon herself,
      lead her to St. Bridget's Gardens.
An interlacing of elm-arms overhead; a thick bed of periwinkle below; on the left a little
      classic river, and an unexpected park with smoky deer; on the right the sacred College meadow,
      where never vulgar foot may fall, save of the haymakers, who have but lately built the grass
      and flowers into a scented stack. Above, below, around, tranquillity and solitude. For,
      loveliest of the College walks as is St. Bridget's, it is, strange to say, also the least
      frequented. Thither the accursed perambulator
       cannot come; and thither the holiday clerk and milliner come not. It is all, or
      nearly all, her own. Each Sunday, as the town empties, it will grow more and more her own.
Over the patterned walk, where tree and sun have laid their chequers as a carpet for her
      feet, she marches leisurely. She has not hurried upon any other Sunday; therefore she will not
      hurry to-day. No one can or shall be able to say that she has departed one jot from her
      accustomed habits.
She is making for her usual seat—the one that ordinarily no one disputes with her. But
      to-day, as it comes into view, she perceives that it is already occupied. The occupant must be
      a friend too, since, on catching sight of her, he comes hasting— young and most glad—to meet
      her. Ah—h! it is not a question of the Grosse Garten over again. To-day she is not
      first. Not that there is any parallel between the cases. Not that anyone can call
       this a
       rendezvous. He does not think it necessary to offer any apology for, or
      explanation of, his appearance, and passes over, with a silent lenity, her little futile and
      ill-done expression of surprise.
"So we meet here again!"
"Shall we sit down?" he says, pointing to the bench whence he has just risen.
For an instant she hesitates, then—
"Yes, I do not mind," she says irresolutely. "I do not know why I should not; I sit here
      every Sunday."
Is there in this any slightest departure from use or custom? He seats himself beside, yet
      not near her; for he sees her frightened eye jealously measuring the interval between them; to
      be sure that it is wide enough. How still it is! Neither human voice nor metal heard from the
      city. Everyone must be in church. Is this really happening? Perhaps if he speak, if he make
      her speak, it will grow more real.
"So you are all alone here?"

"I have the dogs."
"But besides the dogs, no one? not your sister?"
"Did you think that she would be here? did you expect to find her here?" asks Mrs. Forth
      quickly, while a storm of colour sweeps across her face.
He has no slightest clue to the origin of that red tempest; he only knows that it has
      trebled her beauty. Did God ever before create such a wonder of loveliness as she?
"I—I do not know," he answers inattentively, a sin towards her of which he is seldom guilty;
      "I—I do not think I thought about it."
Wide of the mark, as we usually are in our judgments of those who have either too much or
      too little interest for us, she attributes his verbal unreadiness to a cause far removed
      enough from the real one.
"Sarah offered to stay with me," she says in an ungenial voice, sitting very upright,
       and looking rigidly before her; "but I could not be so selfish as to accept such
      a sacrifice from her. I could not condemn anyone to a life of such unredeemed dulness as mine
      now is."
There is an acrimony in her tone that he knows not how to account for; but he does not
      interrupt her. As long as she will speak, he is ever most gladly silent. Why should the air be
      disturbed by his coarse and common voice, when it may be enriched by the music of hers?
"It is by no fault of my own that I am left alone here," continues she, with some sharpness;
      "I wished to go to Switzerland with Mr. Forth. I asked him to take me."
"And he refused?" with an accent of the profoundest incredulity.
To be asked by this woman for leave to bestow her company upon you, and to refuse her! And
      how did she ask? With her arms about his neck? With tears and kisses? He writhes.

"It was not convenient," she answers formally; "he was unable to make it fit in with his
      plans."
The young man's heart burns within him, with a fire of envious indignation too hot to find
      vent in words. And yet perhaps a little of it may pierce through his next speech.
"He could not make it convenient to take you; and he could not make it convenient to stay
      with you; and so here you are, alone and dull."
There is something in his tone—an irony that has the heat of wrath—that rouses again her
      half-smouldering alarms.
"I am alone," she answers quickly, "but I am not dull; I never was less dull in my life; the
      days are not half long enough for me."
"And yet you said—" objects he, bewildered by the staring discrepancy of the statements
      which have followed so close upon each other's heels.
"What does it matter what I said?" interrupts
       she, with a brusque, nervous laugh. "If I may not contradict myself, whom may
      I?"
An elderly couple—two of St. Bridget's rare votaries—have appeared upon the long straight
      alley dominated by Belinda's bench; an alley named after the short-faced humourist who loved
      to pace it. Mrs. Froth is glad. She wishes that more couples would come into sight. It is far
      more sociable.
As they pass, she involuntarily raises her voice in speaking. She is saying nothing that she
      minds either them or anyone else hearing. What a comfort it is to have nothing to conceal from
      the whole world!
As the hours slip by, this happy and confident complacency deepens. But how fast they slip
      away! She cannot affect to be ignorant of their passage, since from the Cardinal's high tower,
      rising above the trees, the deep-mouthed bells tell the death of each little quarter. How
      closely
       they tread upon each other's heels! How many of them have broken the Sabbath
      stillness of the mead? She ventures not to ask nor think. But why does she not venture? It is
      the same as upon other Sundays, for she always stays late. It is with a start that at
      length—seven solemn strokes having beaten the air—she rises to be gone.
"It is seven o'clock!" she says hurriedly. "We must go, or we shall be shut in."
Shut in , in this green enclosure, with the stars for night-lamps, and this woman
      for fellow-prisoner! How dare she make such a suggestion! It is several minutes before he can
      fight down the frantic tumult in his heart that her words have raised, enough to say with
      sufficient composure:
"If you come here every Sunday, I suppose that you will be here next Sunday."
"But you will not!" she cries vehemently, stopping—they are walking slowly
      homewards —and facing him.

"You forbid me?" he says in a low voice. He cannot rid himself of that vision of the
      star-canopied meadow.
"I forbid you!" she answers excitedly; "yes—yes—yes! at least," recollecting herself, "of
      course you are your own master; I have no authority over you; but if I might be allowed to
      advise, I should say," laughing agitatedly, "that it would be a most unnecessary expense— like
      my journey to Switzerland. It is ill manners to remind you—but you know you are poor, until
      the patent is taken out," smiling feverishly. "I must not allow you to make ducks and drakes
      of your money."
"The Sunday after?"
Her answer is long a coming; for indeed it is preceded by an eager dialogue within herself,
      that takes time.
If she prohibit it, so docile is he to her least word or sign, that she knows he will
      acquiesce; and she will sit upon her bench and hear the quarters chime, and see the
       tall tower rise, alone. Even when her reply does come, it is a mere evasion.
There is no need to give a direct answer. It is one of those questions which it is better
      taste to leave unanswered.
"The Sunday after next?" she says with a flighty laugh. "We may be all dead by then; it is
      too far off for me to trouble my head about it!"

</div></body></text></TEI>