<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
CHAPTER I.

"Along the crisped shades and bowers
Revels the spruce and jocund Spring."
Not less lustily than elsewhere is the spruce and jocund Spring revelling in the
      Grosse Garten at Dresden on this May Day. And though there is still in her very frolic a
      disposition to pinch sharply, a certain tartness in her green smile, yet many glad subjects
      have come forth to do homage to her new Queendom. Yes, many; for to-day the Dresdeners—as I am
      told is their custom on each fresh May Day—have issued out on foot and in carriage to welcome
      the year's new sovereign. They are holding a sort of flower-feast; everybody is throwing
       bouquets to everybody else. Above their heads the trees are breaking into little leaf;
      upon the side-paths throng the foot-passengers; along the drives the carriages gaily roll.
      Here is a very smart turn-out. Surely this must be the King and the Queen? Not at all! It is
      only Graf von S. reclining with a self-satisfied air alone in a barouche, richly filled with
      choice nosegays, and drawn by four chestnut horses, with a crimson velvet postilion jigging up
      and down in front, and a crimson velvet outrider trotting bravely behind. An Englishman would
      feel a fool in such a position, but far indeed from a like frame of mind is that of this
      splendid and happy German.
Well, here come the King and Queen really now, with their mouse-coloured liveries; come,
      bowing and smiling with as much affability as if they were real big royalties; no one
      troubling himself to get out of their way; not a policeman to be seen; no open space
      imperatively cleared, as when the Princess of Wales comes
       trotting serenely down the drive. Here are soldiers in plenty; but soldiers thinking for
      the most part neither of war nor beer; soldiers with their martial hands full of innocent
      daffodillies and fresh sweet Nancies. Gardereiters in their light blue uniforms and flat blue
      caps, pricking hither and thither on their sleek horses, carrying bouquets of roses, azaleas,
      deutzias, hyacinths, and seeking here and there with grave gray eyes for the happy fair ones
      for whom they are destined.
Two bands are clashing merrily out; a great booming thump on the big drum makes the horses
      start and fidget. Now, for a change, comes a real English turn-out. One need not look twice to
      decide its nationality. The square-sitting, bolt-upright servants in their quiet liveries; the
      plain but shining harness; the great glossy-coated bays stepping together like one horse—who
      can doubt concerning them? Now more English in hired carriages; but do not judge us by these,
      O kind Saxons; these are not our best! And
       yet it is in one of these very hired carriages that are sitting a pair of young women,
      of whom their England has no need to be ashamed, and who are not at all ashamed of themselves.
      Not that the present is their happiest moment, for the expression of one face is cross, and of
      the other anxious.
"Shall we go home, Belinda?" asks the cross one morosely.
"Why, we have only just come!" objects Belinda.
A Russian carriage passes; a coachman with a hat like a beefeater and a long cloth frock
      pulled in with gathers at the waist. Then more Germans, with bunches of narcissus at their
      horses' ears, and in their servants' breasts. Now a Gardereiter perched on the box of a coach,
      driving six-in-hand, and with a confiding lady in a pink bonnet beside him tranquilly enjoying
      her position nor any wise distrubed by the hopeless muddle into which her hero has got his
      innumerable reins. Another blue Gardereiter flings her a bouquet, but it is
       ill-aimed, falls upon the road, and the wheels pass over it. This sight is too much for
      the fortitude of Belinda's sister.
"I must take some desperate step to attract attention," she says crossly, yet with a vein of
      humor streaking her ill- temper; "what do you recommend? Shall I be frightened at the big
      drum, and give a loud shriek, or will you?"
"Certainly not I!"
"I cannot think what has happened to them! they must be wrong in their heads. Are you aware
      that not one of them has thrown us a single bouquet?"
"Why should they?" answers Belinda; "we know none of them."
"Even though they do not know us, they might toss us a handful of flowers," says Sarah
      grumblingly. "I am sure we look wistful enough, and that requires no great amount of
      acquaintance!"
"I should think it extremely impertinent if they did!" replies Belinda loftily.
The other pouts.
"For my part, them, I wish that
       they would begin to be impertinent at once!"
But for such insolence the Saxon army appears to have no sort of bent. In silence the
      neglected girls drive on. And the sun shines, and the east wind blows, and the big drum booms,
      and the great brass instruments blare, and still they trot round the bit of dull water, up the
      straight drives, past the Museum of Antiquities. A rain of spring nosegays falls around them,
      but not one is aimed at their humble landau; not one drops, even by accident, into their empty
      laps.
Here come the King and Queen again; the mouse-coloured and silver outriders; the suave and
      middle-aged pair of little royalties. The gloom on Sarah's face deepens, and even in Belinda's
      eyes the anxious, seeking look has grown intensified. If they know no one in this gay foreign
      throng, whom is she seeking?
"After all," she presently says, "you knew, Sarah, when you were so anxious to come, that we
      should meet no acquaintance
       here except Professor Forth, and—
"Well, and why is not he here, pray?" cries Sarah, with a burst of genuine ill- humour that
      seems sensibly to ease her.
"Did not I order him to be punctual to the moment? Even he would be better than
      nothing!"
Belinda smiles ironically.
"That is an enthusiastic form of encomium upon the man that you are going to marry!"
But Sarah does not heed. Her eyes are directed to the side walk, where the brisk
      foot-passengers pass and repass.
"There he is!" she cries in a disgusted voice; "certainly there is no mistaking him! Did you
      ever see such a gait in your life? Look at him slouching along on his great flat feet!"
Belinda looks as directed; and sure enough, amid the strapping soldiers erect and tall,
      detects without difficulty a slovenly middle-aged figure, clerical, if you judge
       by its coat; scholarly, if you decide by its spectacles. With his hands behind
      him, and his hat set somewhat on the back of his head, he is mooning absently along.
"Is it possible?" cries Sarah, half-rising from her seat, and in a tone that is almost awful
      from its ire. "Yes; it is monstrous; it is unbelievable! but it is nevertheless true that he
      has not brought me a bouquet after all!"
"Yes, he has," replies Belinda quietly, "only it is so small that it requires a keen sight
      to perceive it."
As they speak, the object of their observation becomes aware of their vicinity, and turning
      his moony scholar's gaze towards them, awkwardly aims at them a tiny bunch of not particularly
      fresh violets. It falls into his betrothed's lap, but not long does it remain there. With an
      angry gesture, and before Belinda can stop her, she has tossed it out into the road; and the
      Gardereiter, with his six black horses, and his confiding companion, who are
       just in the act of again passing, drive over it, and grind it into the dust.
      Thanks, however, to his near-sight the donor is saved from witnessing this humbling
      spectacle.
"I am afraid that my aim was not good," he says innocently, as the carriage draws up at the
      side-walk, exploring, as he speaks, the interior through his spectacles in search of his
      missing posy. "I fear that the nosegay I directed towards you must have fallen short, and
      never reached you."
"Oh yes, it did," replies Sarah, with a sort of ferocious playfulness; "but as it was too
      large for me to carry, I put it outside."
"How late you are!" cries Belinda hastily, trying by a rapid change of subject, and a sweet,
      good-natured smile, to erase the traces of this suave speech. "After playing us so false, you
      cannot expect to find us in a very good humor."
"I was delayed by an accident," replies the lover irritably. "I found the east
       wind so very much keener than I was aware of"—shivering a little and buttoning
      his coat more tightly over his narrow chest—"that, as I am extremely susceptible to cold, I
      was compelled to return to my lodgings for a second overcoat. Sarah knows"—with a rather
      resentful glance at his fiancée —"that I am extremely susceptible to cold."
But Sarah heeds him no more than she does the east wind of which he complains.
"Ah! Bravo!" she is crying joyfully, as another bouquet—a real one this time— large as a
      Cheshire cheese, fragrant as a hot-house, choice and costly as should be young Love's tribute,
      come flying into the carriage.
She has stretched out both hands to grasp it; no doubt as to its destination troubling her
      triumph, although to a looker-on it would have seemed as if it were aimed more at the other
      sister, at Belinda, who has also half-stretched out her hands, but has quickly withdrawn
       them, and turned with patient attention, though with something of a blank look on
      her face, to the Professor's fretful sarcasms on the absurdity of an al fresco
      entertainment in such weather. But though he misses nothing in her civil listening, though her
      head is turned towards him, and quite averted from her sister, yet her ears miss no one
      syllable of that sister's exuberant thanks.
"Come near, that I may bless you!" she hears her cry coquettishly. "You see I have not a
      hand to give you; but you must blame yourself for that. What a giant it is! How fresh! How
      good!"— evidently smelling it. "It has quite put me into good-humour again with this odious
      entertainment. I assure you I never was so flouted in my life. What boors they are! How
      different it would have been if they had been Frenchmen!" etc.,etc.
Perhaps it is that her volubility leaves no space for answers from the person she addresses.
      Certain it is that he is strangely
       silent. Is it not odd to accept gratitude so bounteous with so entire a dumbness?
      In pondering on this problem, Belinda presently loses the thread of the Professor's plaints;
      awakes from her musing to find him first gazing at her with surprised offence, then gone; then
      succeeded in his station at the carriage-door by some one; some one else who has no
      spectacles, who does not stoop nor cower before the east wind; some one young, in short—word
      of splendid compass! He is young: not with the conventional youth loosely assigned by society
      to any unmarried male under eighty, but really young; some one who three-and-twenty years ago
      did not exist.
Who that was not young and callow would be staring at her with all his eyes, and saying
      aggrievedly under his breath:
"Why did you not catch it? You knew I meant it for you!"
She looks back at him: a happy, red smile warming the face that men have often blamed as
      chill and high.

"I did my best!"
"What are you two gabbling about?" cries Sarah restlessly, cutting ruthlessly short a
      sentence of her betrothed's. "Are you saying anything about me? Ah! I see you both look
      guilty!"
Neither undeceives her.
A quarter of an hour later the two girls are bowling homewards to their grand-mamma and
      their apartment in the Lüttichau Strasse, leaving behind them the King, the Queen, the Graf
      von S. in his barouche, and the brave soldiers, both blue and green. Belinda has bent her
      delicate head, and is laying her cheek most tenderly against the blossoms in her sister's
      lap.
"Let me beg of you not to mumble them," cries Sarah politely, interposing a prohibitory
      hand. "You always seem to have an idea that flowers ought to be eaten." Then, seeing a quite
      unaccountable flash of indignation in her sister's eyes, adds generously: "If they were not
      all
       wired, as I see they are, I would spare you an orchid or two."
"Would you indeed!" replies Belinda ironically. But further than this her magnanimous
      silence does not give way.

</div></body></text></TEI>