<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="39">
CHAPTER V.

'This wrong world.'
It is evening. Professor Forth's chilliness has for once vanquished his parsimony;
      and in the grate of his attic room, a small, carefully-nursed, never-poked fire burns
      sparingly cheerful. But he cowers over it, and stretches his hand to its frugal blaze alone.
      One would have thought that such a walk as that undertaken by Mrs. Forth would have been
      enough to satisfy the energies of any reasonable woman; and yet she is again out of doors. She
      is not walking, indeed; she is standing upon the rustic bridge that leads to wood and
      waterfall;
       standing there in the soft dusk—not alone!
They have passed the windows of the garishly-lit public drawing-room, where lamps and jets
      of gas are making a gaudy glare; a heterogeneous assemblage of people, forced into unnatural
      sociability, irksomely driving through an evening in common. Some are working; some are
      playing whist; some are yawning; one is feebly singing; and all are in the fullest blaze of
      the gas and the paraffin. How much better to be outside in the moist, sweet dark! His arms are
      about her, she no longer resisting; and her tired head is resting on his shoulder.
Henceforth she will always have that shoulder on which to lay down her head. What matter,
      wading through what waters she has reached its refuge? A throb of mad, reckless joy thrills
      through all her uneasy body. Since she is to pay the price—and such a price!—let her at least
      have some joy to show for it! Oh, if it
       were but all right!—all on the straight!— what could heaven do better than this?
      Ay! but the might of that "if"!
"And you must go?" she says sighingly; "you think it is quite unavoidable; you
       must ?"
"I must!" he answers, in a tone as grudging as hers; "there is no help for it; there
      are"—hesitating—"there are arrangements to be made—that I must make personally—that could not
      be done by writing; and I must also go to Milnthorpe, to see about my work."
She has raised her head.
"It—this—will not make any difference to your work?" she asks rapidly, and in a tone of
      acute alarm; "it—it will not injure your prospects?"
"Of course not; of course not!" he answers, in a tone of feverish reassurance; "why should
      it? what connection is there between a man's private life and his business relations? What
      concern is it of theirs whether or not I—I—"

"You run away with your neighbour's wife," she says, in a low, hard voice, finishing his
      sentence; "why do not you speak out? if a thing is not too bad to do, it is not too bad to
      say!"
But through the dark he divines the agony of the blush that accompanies her words; and again
      that sword-like pain, which had marred the first moments of his triumphant bliss, once more
      traverses his heart. There is not a breath of air. What has become of yesterday's hustling
      northwind? By the starlight they can dimly see that the clouds no longer fold the
      mountain-heads. They have dropped to their waists, and airily girdle them.
She is resting her feverish hands on the wooden railing, wet with the recent showers, and
      looking down on the half-seen shining rocks, and the water flashing white in the
      semi-darkness. How pleasant is its continuous rush and low roar; and yet there is something
      oppressive in it; something that makes one out of breath!

"You will not be long away?" she says, with a passionate wistfulness; "you will not leave me
      long alone? you will come back as soon as you can?"
"Need you tell me that?"
There is almost derision in his tone. He has drawn her back to her former resting-place, and
      is most soothingly and half timidly caressing her hair. Not yet can he realize that it is the
      glorious proud head which has always seemed farther above him than the stars, that is lying in
      prone abandonment on his shoulder.
"You will not despise me more than you can help?" she whispers, with a sob; dark as it is,
      hiding her face on his breast. "Of course you must despise me; but you will try and
      hide it as well as you can, will not you?"
Are his wits wandering? Can this be his divine and lofty lady, preferring this miserable
      prayer? Can this be he, blasphemously listening to it?
"How am I to get through these days?"
       she moans, clinging to him; "oh, come quickly back! come quick! quick! How am I
      to look him in the face without telling him what I am planning against him? if he says one
      kind word to me, it will be the death of me! Happily for me, he never does!"
For all answer, he only strains her more desperately to his heart. What words can he find
      with which to console her? Surely that silent embrace, strongly enveloping her with its love
      and its pity, is best.
"I shall be always fancying that you are growing tired of me," she says, still whispering,
      and her speech broken by dry sobs; "promise not to grow tired of me! promise! Remember that I
      shall have nothing— nothing but you in the whole wide world; and that when you are
      gone from me, everything will be gone! But what is the use of making you promise?"
      with a despairing change of key; "how can you help it? If you grow tired of me, you
       will grow tired; and there will be an end of it!"
She has pulled herself out of his arms; and now stands apart from him, as if in prophetic
      renunciation. He puts up his hand to his head as if his brain were turning.
"When you say such things," he cries incoherently, "you make me feel as if my senses were
      gone! I grow tired of you! I! I! Oh, my love, my lady, my Queen!" falling
      down at her feet, and kissing the hem of her gown, as if no humility of posture could
      adequately express the abasement of his soul before her; "if you knew how I am eating my heart
      out with the thought that you may grow tired of me ! that you may find out I
      am not worthy of the sacrifice you are making for me!—that I , only I! —oh
      my poor love! my poor love!—may not be enough for you!"
He stops, choked, pressing his head against her trembling knees; and his
       scalding tears filter through her gown. The intensity of his emotion calms her a
      little. At all events, he is not tired of her yet ! She stoops, and lays her hand
      almost protectingly upon his head.
"Yes!" she says; "you will be enough!" But in the dusk her face looks livid, and she ends
      her sentence with a sob.
The next morning he goes—goes, leaving her to live through as best she may, the days that
      must intervene before his return. How—by what process as yet unconjectured by her—is she to
      live through them? They will pass, of course. No day has yet dawned upon sad humanity that did
      not pass; even Damiens' death-day passed. But how? The weather, at all events, will not come
      to her help. It has changed from capricious showers back to such headstrong, hopeless rain as
      accompanied their drive from Lowood. There will be no seeking escape in mountain walks; no
      tiring down thought by tired muscles.

"How am I to live through them?" she says, as she stands alone, at the window of
      her husband's room, staring vacantly through the smeared pane, which baffles sight, and
      waiting for him to be ready to begin work.
He has entered the room without her perceiving it. Has she spoken her last words aloud? She
      hardly knows.
"What are you looking at?" he asks.
She gives a great start.
"I—I—am looking at the rain!"
"I hope that you will content yourself with looking at it," retorts he drily. "I must exact
      a promise from you that you will not, by exposing yourself to it, incur the danger of that
      relapse with which you were obviously threatened yesterday."
"I promise," she answers docilely.
Since she is going to be guilty of this one enormous treason against him, she may at least
      pay him the mint, and anise, and cummin of any tiny obedience that comes in her way.

"But I shall have no temptation," she adds feverishly. "I want to work to-day: I am up to a
      great deal of work. You need not be afraid of overworking me today!"
(It is an uncalled-for caution! He has never been at all afraid of overworking her.) And
      yet, indeed, it is from him, and not from her, that the first suggestion of an interval from
      labour comes. The after-noon is four hours old, and the faint smell of the brandy-and-water
      that temperately irrigated the Professor's luncheon is beginning to die out of the close room,
      when:
"Your writing has become unsteady," he says, looking critically over her shoulder; "I
      presume that your hand is growing tired. Perhaps we had better desist until to-morrow."
"No! no!" she cries vehemently; "why should we? I am not at all tired! it was only
      carelessness. I will take more pains."
"You are unable any longer to concentrate
       your attention," he says, pursuing his examination; "you have omitted two most
      important words."
"Have I?" she answers remorsefully; "but indeed I am not tired! I had much rather go on;
      there—there is no time like the present!"
"To-morrow," he begins; but she interrupts him.
" To-morrow !" she repeats feverishly; "who knows what may happen to-morrow? We may
      both be dead to-morrow!"
The Professor dislikes the mention of death.
"Psha!" he says crossly; "what is the use of indulging in puerile suppositions?"
But she has her will. Until the hour of dinner she toils on. She has not, indeed, attained
      her end—that state of numb woolliness to which yesterday a less portion of labour had brought
      her. To-day, overwork has had the contrary effect of sharpening to its highest capability
      every power of thought, memory, and imagination.

She goes down to the table d'hôte alone. The Professor, labouring under some real
      or fancied accession to his ailments, has (having, however, previously taken care to notify in
      good time his intention) restricted himself to the delight of a basin of gruel over his own
      fire. Belinda is placed at dinner beside a couple who had been fellow-inmates with her of the
      Lowood Hotel, and who, like her, had come on hither. She had been on terms of friendly
      civility with them, and they now express pleasure at having again met her, and try to draw her
      into conversation. But she repulses all their efforts with a surly brevity. They shall not
      have to say afterwards that she let them talk to her.
And now the day— one day—is ended, and it is night. Oh, these nights! Dreadful are
      they—dream-haunted, nightmareridden! and yet neither dream nor nightmare are comparable for
      horror to their waking moments. And through them all, the waterfall pours, pours, in its
      maddening
       monotony. Sometimes she feels as if she must tell some one;
       must rush out to some of the sleeping strangers and tell them! Perhaps it would not
      sound so bad if it were told! After all, such things happen every day. Her loss will be no
      loss to her husband; an economy rather!
She laughs bitterly. He will be glad to be rid of her. Has not everybody with whom she has
      lived hitherto been glad to be rid of her? Could her grandmother contain her joy at having
      shaken her off? Professor Forth, too, will be glad to be rid of her. By-and-by, he
      will be glad to be rid of her! Oh, the despair of that thought! She will see him growing tired
      of her! Loyal gentleman as he is, he will try his best to hide it; but he will not hide it
      from her! She will be jealous of the very air for touching his face; every day she will ask
      herself, "Is he quite the same? Is he quite as glad to see me as he used to
      be? Does he call me his darling quite as often as he did?"
       She will see his love slowly sliding—sliding away from her. What will she have
      to bind him to her? Not honour, for she will have cast off honour; not real love, for real
      love goes only with respect, and she will have said good-bye to respect; she will have shaken
      hands with shame. The cold sweat of agony stands on her brow. Whether or not there be a hell
      elsewhere, she has found hers here.
The last day has come; the last of the three that are to intervene between his going and the
      morning when she is to meet him at Keswick railway station, bidding, for his sake, farewell to
      husband, friends, and good repute.
Two nights such as the one I have described; two days which, though inferior in agony, seem
      yet to have been crammed as full of mental suffering as they can hold, have brought her to the
      verge of a nervous fever. At the lightest noise it seems as if she must scream out loud. She
      is, as usual, at her toil in her husband's
       room. She has changed her position, so that she may not see him as she writes;
      so bitter is the remorse with which the sight of his withered face and shrunk figure fills
      her. Poor old man! What has he done to her, that she should deal him this murderous blow?—for
      a murderous blow it is to his honour, if not to his heart. By what right is she stabbing him
      in the dark? Because he is old, sickly, and peevish? Was not he all three —did not she know
      him to be all three— when she married him? How little he suspects her! Exacting and
      undemonstrative he may be, but how perfect is his confidence in her!
"You look feverish," he says.
There is, or she fancies it, a tone of kindness, almost compassion, in his voice; and in a
      moment she has fallen on her knees. It is not too late, even yet! She will tell him all.
"What the deuce are you about?" cries he acrimoniously. It is very seldom that
       he employs even so small an oath as the one recorded; and his present indulgence
      in it is a measure of his irritation. "You have let fall a great blot of ink upon Gregory
      Nazianzen!"
For a moment she still kneels there, stunned; then, slowly recovering her senses, and healed
      completely of her impulse towards confession:
"I beg your pardon," she says, stammering; "I—I had dropped something. I—I—was going to look
      for it!"
The hours pass by. They seem at once to crawl and to rush. With no one but her husband does
      Belinda exchange a word. She has sufficiently snubbed into silence, and rejected with eager
      rudeness, the efforts of the civil visitors; who, attracted by her beauty, and compassionating
      her apparent loneliness (the Professor has adhered to his régime of solitude and
      gruel), have tried to include her in their talk. She has harshly rebuffed a little child, who,
      encouraged by former notice,
       has run up to make friends with her. None of them shall be able to say
      after-wards that she forced her company upon them—that company which they will then look upon
      as pollution.
The dinner hour is near, and she is standing outside the hotel door, drawing long gasping
      breaths. Is it a little easier to live out of doors than in? It has been another wet day; the
      sun has been neither seen nor heard of; but now, so near the hour of his daily dying, he
      asserts himself. From beneath a lead-heavy pile of rain-clouds he is thrusting his head; but
      his radiance is tempered to a weird, moony splendour. About the hills' necks are thrown
      cobwebby kerchiefs of vapour; and to all these he lends a nameless plae opulence. In the sky
      he builds up an aërial city, augustly fair as that one seen in trance at Patmos; and on the
      waters his sovran feet have trodden a straight path of quivering diamond. Across this royal
      path a little boat has the presumption
       to take its course; and at once is harmonized into a solemn unity with the
      transfigured water and the mountain pinnacles—pinnacles as of the great City of God.
Belinda looks at it all with a wild, dry eye, and a choked throat. Oh, beautiful, cruel,
      terrible world! Would not it be easier to endure if it were ugly and unsightly? if there were
      not this horrible contrast between its fair shows and its hideous realities? The sight is of
      such strange loveliness that at every window of the hotel heads are thrust out to admire it. A
      little group of people have followed Mrs. Forth's example, and issued out into the road. The
      lady with whom she had been on friendly terms at Lowood is standing near, and addresses
      her.
"Why will you never speak to us now?" she asks, in a wondering voice; "I am afraid,"
      laughing a little, "that you must think that there is something wrong about us; that we have
      run away, perhaps, and
       are not married! Mamma met some people like that at Spa last year; it was so
      awkward, for she had made quite friends with them!"
She stops abruptly, for the woman she addresses has turned ghastly, unaccountably pale. The
      evening is one of extraordinary stillness. On the satiny water the heavens lie exactly copied,
      cloud for cloud, clear sky-field for clear sky-field! That strange pallid effulgence—lessened
      indeed, fainting away by slow degrees into obscurity—is yet still there; an effulgence not of
      the gold and carmines and purples that one usually associates with sunset; but of a paler,
      whiter, lunar quality.
Again those sobs rise in her throat. Oh, lovely, ironical world! when will you cease jeering
      us in our misery? And now it is night. She has gone to bid her husband good-night. Often, on
      previous occasions, she has omitted this ceremony as nugatory; but now a morbid impulse to be
      at
       all events lacking in no little dues of courtesy towards him, possesses her.
She finds him sitting stooped over his hearth, with his empty gruel-basin beside him, and
      his fleshless hands absorbing the last warmth of the expiring fire.
"I have come to say good-night."
"Have you? Good-night."
Now that the ceremony is concluded, it is clear that he expects her to retire; but still she
      lingers, and again that longing to fall on her knees and tell him all sweeps over her. Poor
      old man! How old and feeble and lonely he looks!
"You are not ill?" she says, unsteadily.
"According to you, I am never ill," replies he drily; "I enjoy the most robust health; if I
      were to tell you that I were ill, you would discredit the assertion!"
"Oh, but I should not," she cries remorsefully; "I quite believe that you often, often
      suffer. Is there—is there— nothing I can do for you?"
"You can shut the door," replies he,
       with a snarl; "a thing that, since the beginning of my acquaintance with you, I
      have never known you do! and since it is already past my usual hour for retiring to bed, I
      will ask you to shut it upon the outside !"

</div></body></text></TEI>