<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Belinda: A Novel</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1883</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">
CHAPTER VII.
One would have thought that upon the most inveterate pleasure-seekers such a
      cold-water douche could not have been poured without producing a permanently healing effect;
      that never again would the members of the little band, so disastrously surprised in mid-romp
      by the Professor of Etruscan, lift up their humbled heads from the dust, into which that one
      glance of his narrow eye had abased them. And yet it is but too true—such is the potency of
      the spring and youth spirits, when they meet in lusty embrace—that before forty-eight hours
      are over they are planning another excursion.

A whole long day spent chiefly in her own society, for Belinda has had to expiate by working
      double tides her short idleness, has convinced Sarah of the wisdom and necessity of catering
      for her own amusement. By some means, whether of writing, or meeting on neutral ground, she
      has established a communication with Bellairs and his friends; and in their eager hands,
      guided by her commanding spirit, the project of a new expedition for the following day—
       i.e. , the day but one after their being put to the rout—speedily takes shape. It is
      indeed shorn of its former noble proportions, for it is not likely that Mrs. Forth will soon
      be indulged with another whole holiday; but upon a part—the latter part— of the afternoon she
      may, without undue sanguineness, reckon as lawfully her own; and now that the evenings are so
      long, it is of little consequence how late, whether lit by red sun or white moon, they
      return.
Belinda has no share in the formation of the plan. She knows of it, indeed. Did
       she not know of it, would she not have broken down under the pitiless labours of the
      interminable day that intervenes between it and its abortive predecessor? A sort of
      superstition keeps her from inquiring as to any of its details. To take for granted that it
      will happen, will, judging by all precedent and analogy, probably prevent it. Much less dares
      she ask whether Rivers is to be included in it.
"I do not even know of whom your party consists," she says at last, over-night, to her
      sister, emboldened by the after-dinner twilight, in which they are strolling round and round
      the odorous garden plat, and fondly trusting that for once that sister's acuteness may be at
      fault, and not detect the ill-hidden motive of her words.
"Of whom it consists?" repeats Sarah carelessly, lifting and spreading out one hand, and
      striking the fingers, one after one, with the index of the other. "You,"
       touching the thumb, "I, Mr. Bellairs, Mr. Staveley, Mr. De Lisle."
She has reached the little finger, and there pauses.
"Two ladies and three men?" comments Belinda, in tremulous interrogation.
Sarah does not contradict her.
"We should have been six last time," says Mrs. Forth, after a short silence.
"Yes, six," assents Sarah.
Belinda's heart beats low. She withdraws her hand from her sister's arm, upon which it has
      been resting, ostensibly to hold up her gown; but in a moment that gown is again trailing
      unregarded behind her. Why has she been gazing with such elation at the steady roses and
      ambers of the west? Promise-breaking as evening skies are, surely no sky could break such a
      promise as this! If what Sarah implies be true, what does it matter whether that promise be
      kept or broken?
"You have not asked Mr. Rivers?" she says at last, with abrupt desperation, seeing
       that her sister volunteers no further information.
"I have certainly not asked him," replies Sarah gravely, with a slight stress upon the
      pronoun.
Mrs. Forth does not perceive the significant accentuation; and only gathers that her fears
      are realized. It is a moment or two before she can speak. Then,
"That was civil!" she says, in a resentful low key; "but I suppose that in the case of a
      common workman in an iron foundry—"
"Stay!" interrupts Sarah calmly, "before you say anything more, for which you might
      afterwards be sorry. I may as well tell you that he is invited. I had, God knows, no
      hand in it; but Mr. Bellairs invited him, and very officious I think it was of him!"
The morning has come. The sunset has been better than its word. No average fair day is this,
      upon which it simply does not rain, but one that earth, air, and sky
       from morn to eve vie in nobly decking; such a day as that one before which old George
      Herbert poured the nard and spices of his curious sweet verse, which for two hundred years has
      risen to most hearts and lips on any day of unusual summer splendour. It is certain that this
      time the weather at least will throw no obstacle in her way. The forenoon, of hot labour to
      the one sister, of luxurius cool idling to the other, is past and gone. So is luncheon.
The hour for departure draws near. Sarah is already dressed; dressed to the last button of
      her Paris gloves; to the last bewitching pinch given to the fantastic rural hat, whose pulling
      to pieces and rebuilding has largely helped in the beguiling of her lonely morning.
Belinda, usually punctual, and to-day, as one would think, with treble motives for
      punctuality, has not yet appeared. But just as the impatient Sarah is turning over in her mind
      the advisability of hurrying her
       by a call, she enters. At sight of her, an exclamation of surprise and remonstrance
      rises to her sister's lips.
"Not dressed yet?"
For, indeed, about Mrs. Forth there is no appearance of festal preparation; her head is
      uncovered; she is in her usual working morning gown—a gown to which traditions of ink and
      folios seem continually to adhere; her steps are languid, and her eyes dead.
"I am not going," she answers doggedly, throwing herself into a chair. "I must give it
      up!"
"Give it up?" repeats the other, with an incredulity born of the recollection of Belinda's
      passionately eager watching of the sunset over-night; "why?"
"He cannot spare me," replies Belinda, in a dull, level tone; "he says that he is ill."
" Ill ? what is the matter with him?"
"I really forgot to inquire whether it was his heart or his liver to-day," rejoins the
      other, with a sort of apathetic satire. "It
       is always either his heart or his liver; except now and then when it is his
      spleen!"
"Whichever it is," says Sarah bluntly— "and I suppose you mean to imply that it is not any
      of them, really—I do not see what good you can do!"
"I can give him his drops," replies Belinda, with the same artificial tameness; then, life
      coming back in poignant pain into her tone: "While you are on the river, I shall be giving him
      his drops! Oh!" turning over writhingly in her chair, and half burying her face in the
      cushion, "what will not the river be to-day! You will lie under the willows; they will push
      your boat right under the branches! You have never done it; you do not know what it is to lie
      under the willows on a day like this!"
She ends with something not far removed from a sob; then, sitting upright again, and
      resentfully regarding her sister:
"You do not seem very sorry: if one
       were of a suspicious disposition, one might almost say you looked glad."
"As usual you are beside the mark," replies Sarah calmly. "I was reflecting that in all
      probability the whole expedition must now fall through, as not even I dare brave Oxbridge
      public opinion by taking to the water with four young men and without a chaperone."
"Of course not!" cries Belinda, catching eagerly at this suggestion, and with a feeling as
      of a burden most unaccountably lightened; "it would be quite out of the question!"
How comparatively easy it will be to administer Professor Forth's drops, with no
      simultaneous mental consciousness maddening her of the dazzling water, the sheltering
      grey-green willow-arch, and of Rivers lying beneath it, laughing as Sarah, alas! knows how to
      make him laugh, stretched in lazy forgetful enjoyment at her feet. The distinctly disappointed
      expression painted on Miss Churchill's pink
       and white lineaments brings her back to a consciousness of her selfishness.
"I could ask Mrs. Baker whether she would take you," she says slowly, in reluctant
      suggestion; "she is fond of the river, and she lives only two houses off. Do you
      think"—dragging her words some-what, and hoping, oh, how ardently! for an answer in the
      negative—"that it would be worth while asking Mrs. Baker to take you?"
"Eminently worth while!" replies Sarah joyfully, the sparkle returning at a handgallop to
      her eyes.
Belinda has already repented of her offer, but shame prevents her now going back from it.
      She seats herself at the writing-table, and Sarah walks to the window.
"I can see them all at the corner of the road," she says, chuckling; "they dare not come any
      farther than the corner, and even there I can see that they are in a cold sweat of
      apprehension."
Belinda writes on: that most unkillable of plants—hope—sending up a little fresh
       shoot in her heart; after all, fate may be kind. It may have sent Mrs. Baker a
      previous engagement, a headache—what not? But fate disdains to be dictated to. If it is kind
      to us, it is out of its own free will, and not at our bidding.
"She will be delighted," says Sarah, returning in an impossibly short space of time; Sarah,
      who, to ensure the greater security and speed, has insisted upon being herself the bearer of
      the note. "She is very much obliged to you for thinking of her; she is putting on her things
      now, and will be at the corner as soon as I."
Miss Churchill is bustling away, perhaps not very anxious to take a prolonged farewell look
      at her sister's face; but that sister detains her.
"I will go with you as far as the corner," she says feverishly, catching up a shabby
      garden-hat, and throwing it on her hot head as she speaks.
Before she has gone six yards she has repented of her impulse. There seems to
       be in these days not one of her actions of which she does not repent before it is
      halfway to execution. Why should she, of her own free will, forcing him to a comparison
      between them, set herself, poor workaday drudge as she is, beside this charming holiday
      creature—so delicately fine, so infectiously gay? Even now she would go back, but it is too
      late. The young men have caught sight of her: in a moment they have all met.
Rivers exhales a heavy sight of relief. He has had bad dreams, and a dragging presage of
      ill-luck hanging about him; but both dreams and presage are as false as dreams and presages
      mostly are. Had not they told him that she would be prevented coming? and is not she here
      standing in beautiful bodily presence before him? Is he likely to observe the age of her hat,
      or the humility of her gown? He, never one of those man-milliners who can price, to a groat, a
      woman's laces; he, to whom it has always seemed as if, whatever
       sheath his bright flower-lady wore, she informed it with her own glory.
"I hope you will enjoy yourselves," she says, letting her hand linger for an instant in his,
      and lifting her melancholy eyes to his face.
"We!" he says, laughing softly, though his heart misgives him; "and why not you?"
"I am not going," she answers quietly, though her eyes rivet themselves with an intentness
      of passionate jealousy on his face, to see whether he looks sorry enough.
He steps back a pace or two, loosing her hand.
"Not going?" he echoes blankly.
His dreams, his presage spoke true after all—worse than true, indeed! for have not they
      tricked him with the shadow of a hope?
"Come along—come along!" cries Sarah blithely, marshalling her pack and whipping up the
      stragglers; "we are late already. Why do not we set off? Mr.
       Rivers, will you hold my parasol while I search for my pocket? This is a new
      gown, and a horrible misgiving seizes me that it has not a pocket."
She addresses him so decidedly that he has no alternative but to answer her, nor does she
      again let him go.
Before Belinda can realize that it is so, they are all off, walking away from her— away to
      the river and the willows. Without one word of regret for her absence, without even an inquiry
      as to the cause of that absence, he is gone—gone a-pleasuring!
His face indeed looked blank for a moment, but for how long, pray? Does it look blank still?
      Will it look blank under the willows? If her withdrawal from the party had been to him what
      his would have been to her, would he have gone at all? would not he have framed some excuse
      for escape at the last moment? Nor does she, in her unjust heart-bitterness, reflect that he
      could have taken no surer way of compromising the woman he loved!
       Happily perhaps for her, she is not long able to give herself up undisturbed to
      reflections of the above kind. She must needs retun without further delay to her treadmill. It
      is true that the morning, and the morning's Menander, are over—ill as is the Professor, he is
      not too ill for Menander —but her afternoon taskwork is still unperformed; her daily two
      hours' ministrations to her imbecile mother-in-law—two hours during which that mother-in-law's
      attendant is released, and sent out into the fresh air to lay in a stock of ozone and
      endurance to support her through the other twenty-two. The thought of her fellow drudge makes
      Belinda remorsefully hasten her steps. What business has she, with her selfish repinings, to
      defer and shorten that other drudge's holiday?
"Do not hurry back," she says good-naturedly, as she relieves guard. "It is a lovely day;
      take your time and enjoy yourself; I am in no hurry."
Oven-like as is the temperature of old
       Mrs. Forth's room, her easy-chair is drawn up close to the blazing fire. The
      chill of extremest eld is upon her. Her mind is so completely gone, that she is incapable of
      recognizing or identifying even the persons habitually about her; nor does her daily interview
      with her daughter-in-law ever begin with any other phrase than:
"Who are you, my dear? If you will believe me, I do not know who you are!"
Her conversation, which never ceases, consists of this question repeated ad
       infinitum ; of inquiries after various long-dead members of her family, supposed by her
      to be alive and sometimes even in the room; and of information such as that her father has
      been sitting with her (if he were alive he would be one hundred and sixty years old!), and
      that it is wonderful how he keeps his memory.
Belinda seats herself beside her.
After all, it requires no great call upon the intellect to repeat at intervals in a slow,
       loud voice (for, with the other faculties, hearing too is gone):
"I am Belinda! Belinda Forth—James's wife; your son James's wife!" varied occasionally by
      such answers as these, called forth by appropriate inquires, "He is dead!" "He died
      twenty-five years ago!" "Woking Cemetery!"
But between her mechanical words there is plenty of room to interpolate thoughts that but
      little match them.
"They must have reached the river by now. Have they walked all the way in the same order as
      that in which they set off? He and Sarah ahead, and the rest herding behind. Of course they
      have. Since both are pleased with the arrangement, why change it? How murderously hot this
      fire is! Is it inside her that it is burning? They are embarked now. Have they chosen a punt,
      or a pair-oar? Perhaps both, since there are six of them. In that case the party will divide;
      but how?"
It is easy to tell, by the writhing of her
       hands, in what manner she pictures that division effected. Virtually, then, it
      will be a tête-à-tête . It will be alone together that they will lie under the
      willows!
Belinda's attention wanders wide. Twice she has answered, "Woking Cemetery!" when she should
      have answered "James's wife"; and is on the point of repeating the error a third time, when a
      vague fidgetiness in her interlocutor's manner—hazily conscious of something gone
      wrong—recalls her to herself.
The two hours march by. The nurse has taken her at her word, and is extending a little the
      border of her liberty.
Presently the Professor enters: enters to pay that punctual daily five minutes' visit, which
      is the share he contributes towards the tendance of his parent. For a wonder, she knows him,
      without being told who he is.
"Where is your father, James?" is her first question.
"Gone, my mother."

" Gone !" (with great animation and surprise), "gone where?"
"To the Better Land, my mother" (very loud).
"Oh indeed! Well, I only hope that they are taking good care of him: if I know that he is
      well looked after, that is all I care for!"
Belinda gasps. She has heard it all scores of times before: at first with pitiful wonder;
      then with a dreary amusement; and lastly with the indifferent apathy of use. To-day there
      seems to be a new and grisly jocularity about it. This then is life! A youth of passionately
      craving and foregoing; long pursuing and never overtaking; of hearts that leap for a moment
      and ache for a year; of jealousies that poison food and massacre sleep—leading up to an old
      age of garrulous idiocy!
She is released at last: set free to amuse herself as she best pleases. But of what
      amusement is a mind in such tune as hers capable? She has taken her hat in her
       hand, and walks along drawing in great gulps of the exquisite evening air; while
      her feet, without her bidding, lead her to the river-side.
Oxbridge is, as everyone knows, rich in two rivers, and it is to the lesser of these streams
      that the boating-party has committed itself. It is this lesser stream, also, which for a short
      part of its course St. Ursula's green meadow and pleasant walk border.
It is without any acknowledged hope of meeting them that she takes the direction indicated.
      It is likely that they will be so early returning? Is it likely that they, or any one of them,
      will be in much haste to abridge such an excursion? Tasting, as she now does, the delicacy of
      the air; viewing the homely loveliness of bushed bank and satin-sliding river, she can the
      better and more enviously figure to herself what its charm has been. But the air and the
      motion do her good. Beside her the stream steals along—a soothing, sluggish
       companion. No song or rush has it, like the flashing northern becks; but what
      green reflections in it! What long water-weeds, swinging slowly to its slow current! How the
      willows—pensive almost as olives in their grave dim leafage—have printed themselves on its
      quite, silent heart. How riotously green are the fat low meadows that, all winter long, the
      floods had drowned!
Here, a May-bush has strewn the white largesse of its petals on the water, and there
      another, less overblown, stoops to look at its own pink face's double. There are two cuckoos:
      one loud and near, one soft and distant, answering each other across the meads. Beneath the
      bank at her foot, an undergraduate lies stretched along his boat, with his book. Three others
      in a punt are waggishly trying to upset each other. She sits down on a bench and idly watches
      them, till, with shouts of young laughter, they float out of sight. Another punt, a canoe, a
      skiff, a boat with ladies in it.
       Her heart jumps. Ah, no! not her ladies! a boat freighted with hawthorn boughs
      and guelder-rose branches, that tell of a joyous day's Maying in the country. Endless young
      gentlemen in flannels, punting, sculling, lying supine. She has fallen into a dull comparison
      between their gaiety and her own gloom, when her attention is aroused by the sound of a loud
      voice coming from some bark yet unseen, that is approaching round the corner. Many of the
      boys' voices are loud: what is there then in the timbre of this voice that makes Belinda, at
      the instant that it strikes her ear, hastily rise and pursue her walk? But she might as well
      have remained seated on the bench.
A punt has come into sight, guided, with an unskilfulness that seems almost intentional, by
      a young man; colliding frequently with other punts, bumping with many jars against the bank,
      and with an ample female form reclining complacently —superior to bumps or jars—in its
      stern.

"Stop! stop!" she cries, gesticulating with her umbrella in a way which alone would have
      been enough to identify her. "Belinda! Belinda!"
All the luxurious young gentlemen turn their heads to look. One of the white terriers seated
      by their masters in boats, sets up his nose and howls.
Reluctant and dyed with shame, Belinda steps to the water's edge.
"George Sampson is taking me out for a row!" cries Miss Watson, in a tone which can leave no
      member of the University ignorant of the fact related; "his people have gone back to London. I
      cannot think what induced them to shorten their visit so much; they came for a week. Why
      should not you get in and come with us? I am sure you will be delighted" (appealing to her
      swain) "if Mrs. Forth will get in and come with us. We are enjoying ourselves immensely!"
The unhappy young man murmurs something that may be taken for assent. The
       perspiration of anguish pours from his brow, upon which is written a dogged shame
      and wrath too deep for words.
"No?" pursues the other, in answer to Belinda's emphatic negative of her proposal. "You are
      not so fond of the water as Sarah, eh? She takes to it like a young duck. I saw them setting
      off this afternoon; they looked such a jolly party. I offered to join them, but they evidently
      did not hear. Why did not you go with them? Not allowed , eh?"
Without looking, Belinda is hotly aware that a pardonable smile has stolen over the features
      of more than one of the listening boys, at the publication of her domestic secrets. There is
      not one of them who has not dropped his book.
"I will not keep you any longer," she mutters in hasty farewell.
But Miss Watson has not yet done with her.
"You should have told the Professor that you owed it to your conscience to
       look after Sarah," cries she, laughing resonantly. "Judging by what I saw to-day,
      you would not have been far out!"
Belinda's cheek, hot with shame a moment ago, grows pale. The impulse to flee leaves her; a
      contrary impulse, such as draws the palpitating canary to the cage-wires and the cat's claws,
      roots her to the spot.
"What do you mean?" she asks faltering. "Was she"—lowering her voice, so as not to be heard
      by anyone else, hating herself for descending to such a question, and trying to carry it off
      with a spurious merriment—"was she—ha! ha!—flirting very nefariously with them all?"
" With them all !" repeats the other in loud irony. "Pooh! that would have been
      nothing; there is always safety in numbers. The others were nowhere. Rivers had it all his own
      way!"
This is what Belinda has been angling to hear, and now she has heard it. It is not then the
      figment of her disordered
       fancy; it must indeed be ovious to have hit the eyes of so coarse and casual an
      observer as Miss Watson. Nor does the recollection of how much she had profited by her former
      prompt action upon information derived from the same source recur to her memory.
"He is a sad dog, is David, is not he?" cries the other jocosely; and then she bumps off
      again in her punt, bawling, as she floats down the stream, to her oppressed and silent
      boatman.

</div></body></text></TEI>