
BOOK II.
CHAPTER I.
 On the following morning Lady Ambrose awoke somewhat out of spirits. Last
                        night, whilst her maid was brushing her hair, she had pondered deeply over
                        much that she had heard during the evening; and her thoughts having been
                        once started in such a direction, the conviction quickly dawned upon her
                        that the world was indeed becoming very bad, and that society was on the
                        point of dissolution. This was quite a new view of things to her, and it had
                        all the charm of novelty. Still, however, she would probably have found by
                        the morning that she had successfully slept it off, if the post had not
                        failed to bring her an invitation to the Duchess of ———’s garden-party at
                        ——— House, which she was expecting with some anxiety. As it was, therefore,
                        her spirits failed to recover themselves, and whilst she was being dressed
                        her thoughts wandered wistfully away to the promised morning service in the
                        chapel. At breakfast, however, another blow awaited her. How a private
                        chapel had come to be mentioned last evening was not clear. Certainly there
                        was no such appendage to Laurence’s villa, and the susceptibilities of Lady
                        Ambrose received a severe shock, as she learnt that the ministrations of Dr.
                        Jenkinson, the comfort of which she was looking forward to, were to take
                        place in the theatre which adjoined the house. She bore up, however, like a
                        brave woman, and resolving that nothing, on her part at least, should be
                        wanting, she appeared shortly before eleven o’clock, in full Sunday costume,
                        with her bonnet, and her books of devotion. 
 Mrs. Sinclair looked at her in dismay. ‘I had thought,’ she said plaintively
                        to Laurence, ‘that, as this was only a morning performance, I need not make
                        a toilette. And as for a prayer-book, why, dear Mr. Laurence, I have not had
                        one since I was confirmed.’ 
 ‘Not when you were married?’ said Leslie. 
 ‘Perhaps,’ said Mrs. Sinclair pensively, ‘but I have forgotten all about
                        that—now.’ 
 At this moment the gong sounded, and the whole party, Lady Ambrose and her
                        bonnet amongst them, adjourned to the place of worship, which was connected
                        with the house by a long corridor. 
 When the party entered they found themselves in a complete miniature
                        theatre, with the gas, as there were no windows, fully burning. It had been
                        arranged beforehand that the guests should occupy the boxes, the gallery
                        being appropriated to the servants, whilst the stalls were to remain
                        completely empty. The congregation entered with great decorum and gradually
                        settled themselves in their places with a subdued whispering. Lady Ambrose
                        buried her face in her hands for a few moments, and several of the younger
                        ladies followed her example. Everyone then looked about them silently, in
                        suspense and expectation. The scene that met their eyes was certainly not
                        devotional. The whole little semicircle glittered with heavy gilding and
                        with hangings of crimson satin, and against these the stucco limbs of a
                        number of gods and goddesses gleamed pale and prominent. The gallery rested
                        on the heads of nine scantily-draped Muses, who, had they been two less in
                        number, might have passed for the seven deadly sins; round the frieze in
                        high relief reeled a long procession of Fauns and Bacchanals; and half the
                        harem of Olympus sprawled and floated on the azure ceiling. Nor was this
                        all. The curtain was down, and, brilliantly illuminated as it was, displayed
                        before the eyes of the congregation Faust on the Brocken, with a long plume,
                        dancing with the young witch, who could boast of no costume at all. The
                        scene was so strange that everyone forgot to whisper or even to smile. There
                        was a complete silence, and the eyes of all were soon fixed upon the curtain
                        in wonder and expectation. 
 Presently a sound was heard. A door opened, and Dr. Jenkinson, in his
                        ordinary dress, entered the stalls. He looked deliberately round him for a
                        moment, as though he were taking stock of those present; then, selecting the
                        central stall as a kind of prie-dieu, he knelt down
                        facing his congregation, and after a moment’s pause began to read the
                        service in a simple, earnest voice. Lady Ambrose, however, though she knew
                        her prayer-book as well as most women, could not for the life of her find
                        the place. The reason was not far to seek. The Doctor was opening the
                        proceedings with the following passage from the Koran, which he had once
                        designed to use in Westminster Abbey as the text of a missionary sermon. 
 ‘Be constant in prayer,’ he began, in a voice tremulous with emotion, ‘and
                        give alms: and what good ye have sent before for your souls, ye shall find
                        it with God. Surely God seeth that which ye do. They say, Verily none shall
                        see Paradise except they be Jews or Christians. This is their wish. Say ye,
                        Produce your proof of this if ye speak truth. Nay, but he who resigneth
                        himself to God, and doeth that which is right, he shall have his reward with
                        his Lord; there shall come no fear on them, neither shall they be
                            grieved.’

 Dr. Jenkinson then went on to the Confession, the Absolution, and a number
                        of other selections from the English morning service, omitting, however, the
                        creed, and concluded the whole with a short prayer of St. Francis Xavier’s. 
 But it was discovered that his voice, unless he made an effort, was
                        unhappily only partly audible from the position which he occupied; and
                        Laurence, as soon as the Liturgy was over, went softly up to him to apprise
                        him of the fact. Dr. Jenkinson was very grateful for being thus told in
                        time. It was fortunate, he said, that the prayers only had been missed; the
                        question was, where should he go for the sermon. Laurence in a diffident
                        manner proposed the stage; but the Doctor accepted the proposal with great
                        alacrity, and Laurence went immediately out with him to conduct him to his
                        new pulpit. In a few moments the curtain was observed to twitch and tremble;
                        two or three abortive pulls were evidently being made; and at last Faust and
                        the young witch rapidly rolled up, and discovered first the feet and legs,
                        and then the entire person of Doctor Jenkinson, standing in the middle of a
                        gorge in the Indian Caucasus—the remains of a presentation of Prometheus
                        Bound which had taken place last February. 
 The Doctor was not a man to be abashed by incongruities. He looked about him
                        for a moment: he slightly raised his eyebrows, and then, without the least
                        discomposure, and in a clear incisive voice, began:— 
 ‘In the tenth verse of the hundred and eleventh Psalm, it is said, “The fear
                        of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.” The fear of the Lord,’ he again
                        repeated, more slowly, and with more emphasis, surveying the theatre as he
                        spoke, ‘is the beginning of wisdom.’ 
 He then made a long pause, looking down at his feet, as if, although he held
                        his sermon-book in his hand, he were considering how to begin. As he stood
                        there silent, the footlights shining brightly on his silver hair, Lady
                        Ambrose had full time to verify the text in her prayer-book. At last the
                        Doctor suddenly raised his head, and with a gentle smile of benignity
                        playing on his lips, shook open his manuscript, and thus proceeded:— 
 ‘The main difficulty that occupied the early Greek Philosophers, as soon as
                        philosophy in its proper sense can be said to have begun, was the great
                        dualism that seemed to run through all things. Matter and mind, the presence
                        of imperfection, and the idea of perfection, or the unity and plurality of
                        being, were amongst the various forms in which the two contradictory
                        elements of things were presented to them, as demanding reconcilement or
                        explanation. This manner of viewing things comes to a head, so to speak,
                        amongst the ancients, in the system of Plato. With him the sensible and the
                        intelligible worlds stand separated by a great gulf, the one containing all
                        good, the other of itself only evil, until we recognise its relation to the
                        good, and see that it is only a shadow and a type of it. The world of real
                        existence is something outside, and virtually unconnected with, this world
                        of mere phenomena; and the Platonic prayer is that we should be taken out of
                        the world, rather than, as Christ says, with a fuller wisdom, that we should
                        be delivered from the evil. 
Plato had, however, by thus dwelling on this antagonism in things, paved the
                        way for a reconciliation—some say he even himself began it. At any rate, it
                        was through him that it was nearly, if not quite, accomplished by his
                        disciple Aristotle. Aristotle first systematised the great principle of
                        evolution, and transformed what had appeared to former thinkers as the
                        dualism of mind and matter into a single scale of ascending existences. Thus
                        what Plato had conceived of as two worlds, were now presented as opposite
                        poles of the same. The πρώτη ὕλη, the world “without form and void,”
                        receiving form, at length culminated in the soul of man; and in the soul of
                        man sensation at length culminated in pure thought.’ A slight cough here
                        escaped from Mrs. Sinclair. ‘You will perhaps think,’ the Doctor went on,
                        ‘that a sermon is not the place in which to discuss such differences of
                        secular opinion; or you will perhaps think that such differences are of no
                        very great moment. But if you look under the surface, and at the inner
                        meaning of them, you will find that they bear upon questions which are, or
                        ought to be, of the very highest moment to each of us—questions indeed,’ the
                        Doctor added, suddenly lowering his manuscript for a moment, and looking
                        sharply round at his audience, ‘which we all of us here have very
                        lately—very lately indeed—either discussed ourselves, or heard discussed by
                        others.’ This produced an immediate sensation, especially amongst the
                        feminine part of the listeners, to whom the discourse thus far had seemed
                        strange, rather than significant. ‘The question,’ the Doctor continued, ‘is
                        one of the relations of the spiritual to the natural; and the opposition
                        between the views of these two ancient philosophers is by no means obsolete
                        in our own century. There is even now far too prevalent a tendency to look
                        upon the spiritual as something transcending and completely separate from
                        the natural; and there is in the minds of many well-meaning and earnest
                        persons a sort of alarm felt at any attempt to bring the two into
                        connection. This feeling is experienced not by Christians only, but by a
                        large number of their opponents. There is, for instance, no doctrine more
                        often selected for attack by those who oppose Christianity upon moral
                        grounds, than that of which my text is an expression, I mean the doctrine of
                        a morality enforced by rewards and punishments. Such morality, we hear it
                        continually urged by men who set themselves up as advanced thinkers, is no
                        morality at all. No action can be good, they tell us, that does not spring
                        from the love of good. Virtue is no longer virtue if it springs from fear.
                        The very essence of it is to spring from freedom. Now, these arguments,
                        though specious at the first blush of the thing, are really, if we look them
                        honestly in the face, to the utmost shallow and unphilosophical. They are
                        really but so many denials of the great doctrine of evolution—so many
                        attempts to set up again that absolute antagonism between good and evil
                        which it has been the aim of all the higher thinkers, and of Christ himself,
                        to do away with. If, then, these modern critics of Christianity come to us
                        with such objections, let us not try to disguise the truth that the morality
                        of our religion is based on fear. Let us rather boldly avow this, and try to
                        point out to them that it is they, and not the Psalmist, that are out of
                        harmony with modern thought. For what is it that the sacred Scripture says?
                        “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.” The beginning, you will
                        please to observe—the beginning only. It is not perfect wisdom, it is not
                        perfect virtue; but it is the beginning of both of these. It is, if I may be
                        allowed the expression, the moral protoplasm—it is that out of which they
                        are both evolved. It is, as Aristotle would call it, their potentiality. The
                        actuality is different from the potentiality; for “perfect love” as St. John
                        says, “casteth out fear.” Putting together, then, the ideas of these two
                        good men, St. John and Aristotle, we may say that the love of God—that is,
                        true wisdom—is the actuality of the fear of Him. 
 ‘This account of the origin of the true wisdom may not, indeed, be
                        applicable to each individual case. Some persons’ — the Doctor’s voice here
                        grew very soft, and seemed as though it would almost break with feeling—’
                        some persons may have been so fortunate as to have received the truest
                        wisdom into their hearts by education, almost with their mother’s milk. But
                        there are those not so fortunate, who may have needed the discipline of a
                        godly fear to lead them upwards front a “wallowing in the sensual sty”
                        towards the higher life. And just as this is true of many of us
                        individually, so it is still more deeply true of the human race as a whole.
                        All study of history, and of social science, and of philosophy, is teaching
                        this to us every day with increasing clearness. The human race, as soon as
                        it became human, feared God before it loved Him. Its fear, as the Scripture
                        puts it, was the beginning of its wisdom; or as modern thought has put it,
                        in slightly different words, the love of justice sprang out of the fear of
                        suffering injustice. Thus the end is different from the beginning, and yet
                        springs out of it. Ethics, as it has been well said, are the finest fruits
                        of humanity, but they are not its roots. Our reverence for truth, all our
                        sacred family ties, and the purest and most exalted forms of matrimonial
                        attachment, have each their respective origins in self-interest,
                        self-preservation, and animal appetite. 
 ‘There is, I admit, in this truth something that may at first sight repel
                        us, and perhaps even prompt some of us to deny indignantly that it is a
                        truth at all. But this is really a cowardly and unworthy feeling, fatal to
                        any true comprehension of God’s dealings with man, and arising from a quite
                        mistaken conception of our own dignity, and our own connection with God. It
                        is some such mistaken conception as this that sets so many of us against the
                        discoveries of modern science as to the origin of our own species, and, what
                        is far worse, prompts us to oppose such discoveries with dishonest
                        objections. How is it possible, some of us ask, that man with his sublime
                        conceptions of duty and of God, and his fine apparatus of reason, and so
                        forth, should be produced by any process of evolution from a beastly and
                        irrational ape? But to ask such questions as these is really to call in
                        question the power of God, and so to do Him dishonour. It is true that we
                        cannot trace out, as yet, all the steps of this wonderful evolution; but let
                        us not be found, like doubting Thomas, resolved not to believe until we have
                        actually seen. And yet, if our faith does indeed require strengthening, we
                        have only to look a little more attentively at the commonest facts before
                        us. For is it not, let me ask you—to take, for instance, a man’s sublime
                        faculty of reasoning and logical comprehension—far more wonderful that a
                        reasoning man should have the same parents as a woman, than that they both
                        should have the same parents as a monkey? Science and religion both alike
                        teach us that with God all things are possible. 
 ‘I just touch in passing upon this doctrine that we popularly call
                        Darwinism, because it is the most familiar example to us of the doctrine of
                        evolution. But the point which I am wishing to emphasize is not the outward
                        evolution of man, but the inward, of which, however, the former is an image
                        and a likeness. This theory of moral evolution, I wish to point out to you,
                        is alike the Christian and the scientific theory; and I thus wish you to see
                        that the very points in which science seems most opposed to Christianity are
                        really those in which it most fundamentally agrees with it. I will therefore
                        just ask you to notice how foolish and short-sighted those persons are who
                        think that a great result is lessened if it can be proved to have had small
                        beginnings. Is a state less truly a state because we know that it has sprung
                        out of the germ of the family? Surely not. Neither is man less truly man if
                        he have sprung from an ape; nor is love less truly love if it has sprung
                        from fear. 
 ‘And so now, since we have seen how science and Christianity are at one as
                        to the rise of the moral sentiments, I will pass on to a wider point, the
                        character and the history of Christianity itself, both of which have been
                        misunderstood and misinterpreted for at least eighteen hundred years; and
                        when I have pointed out how this great subject is being now explained by the
                        methods of modern science, I will pass on to an issue that is wider yet. 
 ‘The world has hitherto failed to understand Christianity, because it
                        studied it upon a false method—a method based upon that old dualistic theory
                        of things of which I have already spoken. Just as Plato looked upon mind as
                        entirely distinct from matter, so used Christians to look upon things sacred
                        as entirely distinct from things secular. But now this middle wall of
                        partition is being broken down by science, and by scientific criticism, and
                        by a wider view of things in general. The primary way in which all this has
                        affected Christianity, is by the new spirit in which it has led us to study
                        the Bible. We used to look upon the Bible as a book standing apart by
                        itself, and to be interpreted by a peculiar canon of criticism. But we have
                        now learnt that it is to be studied just like all other books; and we are
                        now for the first time coming to understand what, in its true grandeur, a
                        real revelation is. We are learning, in fact, that just as no single
                        scripture “is of any private interpretation;” still less is the entire body
                        of the Scriptures. They, too, must be interpreted by their context. We must
                        inquire into their origin; we must ask diligently under what circumstances
                        they were written and edited, and for what ends. Nor must we ever again fall
                        into such quaint and simple mistakes as did commentators like Origen, or
                        Augustine, or Tertullian, or even Paul himself, whose discoveries of
                        Messianic prophecies in writings like the Psalms for instance, are really
                        much the same as would be a discovery on our part in Mr. Tennyson’s line on
                        the death of the Duke of Wellington, “The last great Englishman is low,” a
                        prophecy of the late Chancellor of the Exchequer. But to understand the
                        meaning of any text, we must try to see what, from his position and
                        education, the writer could have meant by it; not what this or that Father,
                        living long afterwards, fancied that he meant. Our motto in religion, as in
                        science, should be, “Vere scire est per causas scire.” 
 ‘If we study Christianity reverently and carefully upon these principles, we
                        shall see that it was not a thing that sprang up, as we used to fancy,
                        without any human antecedents, but that its roots reach back with many
                        ramifications into the western and oriental thought of preceding centuries.
                        We shall see how it absorbed into itself all that was highest in Hebraistic
                        Theism and in Hellenic thought—something too, let us admit, of the failings
                        of both. I cannot here enter into any of the details of this, what may be
                        truly termed pre-Christian Christianity. I can only briefly point out its
                        existence, and its double origin, commenting on these by the following few
                        lines from a great German writer. “The yearning after a higher revelation”
                        he tells us, “was the universal characteristic of the last centuries of the
                        ancient world. This was in the first place but a consciousness of the
                        decline of the classical nations and their culture, and the presentiment of
                        the approach of a new era; and it called into life not only Christianity,
                        but also, and before it, Pagan and Jewish Alexandrianism, and other related
                        developments.” 
 ‘This, then, is the great point to be borne in mind—viz. that God had been
                        preparing the way for the coming of Christ long before he sent “Elias, which
                        was for to be.” Neither John Baptist, no, nor One greater than John, was
                        left by God (as the children of Israel were left by Pharaoh) to gather straw
                        himself to make bricks. The materials were all prepared ready to their hands
                        by their Heavenly Father. And so, let us be especially and prayerfully on
                        our guard against considering Christianity as having come into the world at
                        once, ready-made, so to speak, by our Saviour, as a body of theological
                        doctrines. Any honest study of history will show us that the Apostles
                        received no such system; that our Lord Himself never made any claim to the
                        various characters with which subsequent thought invested Him; and that to
                        attribute such claims to Him, would be an anachronism, of which He would
                        Himself have scarcely understood the meaning. If we only clear our eyes of
                        any false theological glamour, a very slight study of the inspired writers
                        will at once show us this. We shall see how uncertain and shifting at first
                        everything was. We shall see what a variety of conflicting opinions the
                        early Church entertained even upon the most fundamental subjects—such, for
                        instance, as the identity of the God of the Old Testament with the God of
                        the New, which was denied by a large number of the early Christians: we
                        shall see how widely divergent were the systems of Jewish and Pauline
                        Christianity, and how discrepant and tentative are the accounts given by St.
                        Paul and by the author of the Fourth Gospel of the mystical nature of
                        Christ, whom they tried to identify with different mysterious potencies
                        supposed by the Jewish-Alexandrian philosophers to be coexistent with God.
                        And if we pursue the history of the Church a little farther, we shall find
                        many more things to startle us. We shall find, for instance, the most
                        renowned apologist of early Catholic times, a materialist, holding the
                        materiality not of the soul of man only, but of God also. “Nihil enim”—these
                        are this father’s words—“si non corpus. Omne quod est, corpus est.” Thus we
                        see,’ said the Doctor cheerfully, looking round him with a smile of
                        benignant triumph, and blinking with his eyes, ‘that difference of opinion
                        about the dogmas of religion is nothing new. It existed in the Jewish
                        Church; the phenomenon was only prolonged by Christianity. Later Judaism and
                        primitive Christianity were both made up of a variety of systems, all
                        honestly and boldly thought out, differing widely from each other, and
                        called by the honourable appellation of heresies: and of these, let me
                        remind you, it is the glory of the Church of England to be composed
                        likewise. 
 ‘Nor is this all,’ he went on in a softer and more appealing tone; ‘not only
                        are all these things so confused and doubtful; but we now see that, in the
                        face of recent criticism, we cannot even be quite sure about any of the
                        details of the divine life of our Lord. But in all this’—the Doctor’s voice
                        here became still more aërial, and he fixed his eyes upon the painted
                        ceiling of the theatre, as though he were gazing on some glorious vision—‘in
                        all this there is nothing to discompose us. We can be quite sure that He
                        lived, and that He went about doing good, and that in him we have, in the
                        highest sense, everlasting life. 
 ‘Let us then no longer fight against the conclusions of science and of
                        criticism, but rather see in them the hand of God driving us, even against
                        our will, away from beliefs and teachings that are not really those of His
                        son. If we do not do this—if we persist in identifying the false
                        Christianity with the true—the false, when it is at last plucked widely away
                        from us, as it must be, will carry away a part of the true with it. And as
                        long as we are in this state of mind, we are never for a moment safe. We can
                        never open a philological review, or hear of a scientific experiment,
                        without trembling. Witness the discussions now engaging so much public
                        attention on the subject of animal automatism, and the marvellous results
                        which experiments on living subjects have of late days revealed to us; a
                        frog with half a brain having destroyed more theology than all the doctors
                        of the Church with their whole brains can ever build up again. Thus does God
                        choose the “weak things of this world to confound the wise.” Seeing, then,
                        that this is the state of the case, we should surely learn henceforth not to
                        identify Christianity with anything that science can assail, or even
                        question. Let us say rather that nothing is or can be essential to the
                        religion of Christ which, when once stated, can be denied without absurdity.
                        If we can only attain to this conception, we shall see truly that this our
                        faith is indeed one “that no man taketh away from us.” 
 ‘If we be thus once “stablished in the faith” all human history, and the
                        history of Christianity especially, will assume for us a new sacredness and
                        a new significance. We shall recognise gladly its long struggles of growth,
                        and its struggles for existence, and see how in all these were at work the
                        great principles of evolution. We shall see how Christian perfection emerged
                        gradually out of imperfection—nay, that it was only through imperfection
                        that this perfection was possible. For although, as we now know, all the
                        various theological systems that have sprung up about Christianity, and have
                        been so long current, are not Christianity, are most of them, indeed, not
                        even sense—yet it was through these that true Christianity made its way, and
                        extended itself in a corrupt and ignorant world. For the world has been
                        given from age to age just so much of the truth as it has been able to bear,
                        and it is only, let us remember, from receiving it tempered in this wise
                        proportion, that it has been able to receive it at all. But these times of
                        the world’s probation are now passing away. It is now at length ceasing to
                        be under “tutors and governors;” it is learning to “put away childish
                        things.” It is coming to a sense that it is now fitted to receive Christ’s
                        truth pure, and without any admixture or wrappage of falsehood. And so, as
                        it looks back over all the various opinions once so fiercely agitated about
                        religion, it recognises in all of them a common element of good, and it sees
                        that all theologians and all sects have really agreed with one another, and
                        been meaning the same thing, even when they least suspected or wished it.
                        Nor is it, as modern study is showing us, varieties of Christianity only
                        that this deeper unity underlies, but all other religions also. It has been
                        well observed by a great Roman Catholic writer now living, that whenever any
                        great saintliness of life is to be observed amongst infidels and heretics,
                        it is always found to be due to the presence of certain beliefs and rules
                        which belong to the Catholics. And in like manner, we may say too, that
                        whenever any great saintliness of life is to be observed amongst Catholics,
                        it is due to the presence of certain beliefs and rules that belong to the
                        infidels and the heretics—and indeed to all good men, no matter what their
                        religion is. 
 ‘Such are the views that all the most enlightened men of our own day are
                        coming to. But the process is gradual; and meanwhile let us not rebuke our
                        weaker brethren, if for the present “they follow not after us;” let us
                        rather bear with them, and make all allowance for them; for we must
                        remember, as I have said before, that those evils to which they still cling,
                        but from which we, under God’s mercy, are trying to free ourselves, have
                        done good service in their time; and that even such doctrines as those of
                        eternal punishment, or of sacerdotal absolution, or the subtleties of
                        sacramental systems, or the mystical paradoxes of the Athanasian Creed, have
                        assisted in the evolution of the good—have been, in some sense,
                        “schoolmasters to bring men to God.” And even if we do occasionally come
                        across some incident in the history of our religion—some doctrine or body of
                        doctrines, which seems, humanly speaking, to subserve no good end at
                        all—such as our own Thirty-nine Articles—let us not suffer such to try our
                        faith, but let us trust in God, believing that in His secret councils He has
                        found some fitting use even for these; because we know how many things there
                        are, in every branch of inquiry, that we cannot explain, and yet we know
                        that nothing happens but by those immutable and eternal laws which our
                        Heavenly Father has Himself ordained, and of which He is Himself the highest
                        synthesis. 
 ‘And now,’ said the Doctor, with a fresh briskness in his voice, ‘I shall
                        pass on to that wider point to which I have already alluded, which is indeed
                        that which I wish chiefly to impress upon you, and to which all that I have
                        hitherto said has been preparatory. We have come to see how genuine
                        Christianity has been enabled to grow and extend itself only through an
                        admixture of what we now recognise as evil. And seeing this, we shall be led
                        on to a conclusion that is much wider. It has been said that it is the part
                        of the devil to see in good the germs of evil. Is it not also the part of
                        the devil not to recognise in evil the germs of good? May we not indeed say
                        with St. Augustine, that absolute evil is impossible, because, if we look at
                        it rightly, it is always rising up into good? And so, may we not recognise
                        in all things the presence and the providence of God? 
 ‘Perhaps this view may at first sight seem difficult. Some of us may find
                        that we have a certain amount of pride to swallow before we can cheerfully
                        acquiesce in it. It is not an uncommon thing to find persons who secretly
                        flatter their vanity by cherishing a gloomy view of the world and of
                        mankind. But if we can only get free from these littlenesses, and attain to
                        that view which I have indicated, it will enlarge and ameliorate our own
                        philosophy of things, and bring life and trust to us, in the place of doubt
                        and despondency. Evil will then appear to us simply as undeveloped good—as
                        something which we may acquiesce in without complaining—as something that
                        has assisted in the development of whatever is good in the present, and
                        which will itself one day become good in the future. Indeed it is not too
                        much to say that all things, in a certain sense, existed first in the form
                        of evil. It was not till after the Spirit of God had worked on the primeval
                        matter that God pronounced the world to be “very good.” 
 ‘And so, if we consider the subject thus, we shall learn to put a stop to
                        all those fretful wailings over the badness of our own times of which we
                        hear so much—wailings over the unbelief of our neighbours, the corruption of
                        society, the misery of the poor, the luxury of the rich, or the decline of
                        commercial morality. The present is an age of change, and is therefore at
                        every turn presenting to us some new feature. But if these come to us in the
                        apparent guise of evils, let us not uselessly bemoan them; but let us
                        believe that they are, even if we cannot see that it is so, but the
                        beginnings, the embryos of new good. Indeed, by the eye of faith, even in
                        the present day, may be discerned the beautiful spectacle of good actually
                        shining through evil. May we not, for instance, discern the well-being of
                        the rich through the misery of the poor? and again, the honest industry of
                        the poor through the idleness of the rich? 
 ‘If, then, these things be so, surely we may look on unmoved at the great
                        changes and commotions that are going on around its, and the new forms that
                        society, and thought, and politics are assuming, even although for the
                        moment they may appear threatening. And if in this great storm our Master
                        have fallen asleep, and no longer speak audibly to us, let us not be of
                        little faith and fearful, and try to awaken Him with our foolish clamours;
                        but let us trust all to Him, and follow His example. For really, if we do
                        but trust in God, there is no ground for fear, but “all things work together
                        for good to him that believeth.” And, however the matter may strike us at
                        first sight, the times we live in are really the times that are best fitted
                        for us; and we shall see, if we will but think soberly, that we could not,
                        as a whole, alter anything in them for the better. I do not mean that we
                        have not each of us his own work marked out for him to do; but all this work
                        is strictly in relation to things as they are. God has given to us the
                        general conditions under which we are to serve Him, and these are the best
                        and indeed the only conditions for us. Doubtless, if we each do the duty
                        that lies before us, these conditions will be slowly and insensibly changed
                        by us; but we shall ourselves change also, as well as the conditions; what I
                        mean is, that supposing by a sudden act of will we could do what we pleased
                        with the conditions of the age, we, being as we are, should not be really
                        able to make the age better. We should not be really able to make it
                        different. Any Utopia we might imagine would, if it were a thinkable one, be
                        only our own age in a masquerading dress. For we cannot escape from our age,
                        or add, except in a very small degree, anything that is really new to it.
                        Nor need we wish to do so. Our age is for us the best age possible. We are
                        its children, and it is our only true parent. But though we cannot alter our
                        time at a stroke, so to speak, no, not even in imagination, we can all of us
                        help to do so little by little, if we do cheerfully the duties that are set
                        before us. And if we do this, which is what Christ bids us to do, then is
                        Christ made manifest in us, and lives in the hearts of every one of us; and
                        in a far higher sense than any mere physical one, He is risen from the dead.
                        And if He be not so risen in and for us, then are we indeed, as the Apostle
                        says, “of all men most miserable!” 
 ‘Let us therefore, with a large hope for the future, and a cheerful
                        contentment with the present, be willing to leave the world in the hands of
                        God, knowing that He has given us what conditions and what circumstances are
                        best for us. Let us see all things in God, and let us become in Him, as
                        Plato says, “spectators of all time, and of all existence.” And thus, in
                        spite of the difficulties presented to us by “all the evil that is done
                        under the sun” we shall perceive that all things will, nay must, come right
                        in God’s own time; and the apparent dualism of good and evil at last become
                        a glorious unity of good. But let us remember also that “the Kingdom of God
                        cometh not with observation;” and I would conclude my sermon with certain
                        memorable words spoken by Christ Himself, though unfortunately not to be
                        found in the Gospels, but preserved to us by Clement of Alexandria. “The
                        Lord,” Clement tells us, “being asked when His kingdom should come, said,
                        When two shall be one, and that which is without as that which is within,
                        and the male with the female—neither male nor female.” 
 ‘—And now—’ (at the sound of this word the whole congregation rose
                        automatically to their feet),‘I will ask you,’ the Doctor went on after a
                        pause, ‘to conclude this morning’s service by doing what I trust I have
                        shown that all here may sincerely and honestly do. I mean, I will ask you to
                        recite after me the Apostles’ Creed.’ 
 This appeal took the whole congregation quite aback. But there was no time
                        for wonder. Dr. Jenkinson at once began; nor was his voice the only sound in
                        the theatre. Lady Ambrose, pleased, after all that she had heard the night
                        previous, to make public profession of her faith, especially in a place
                        where it could not be called in question, followed the Doctor audibly and
                        promptly; Miss Prattle followed Lady Ambrose; Lady Violet Gresham, who was
                        busy with one of her sleeve-links, followed Miss Prattle; Lady Grace, from
                        quite another part of the house, followed Dr. Jenkinson on her own account;
                        Mr. Stockton repeated the first clause in a loud voice, and then relapsed
                        into marked silence; Mr. Luke only opened his lips to sigh out audibly in
                        the middle a disconsolate ‘Heigh ho!’ Mr. Storks blew his nose with singular
                        vigour through the whole proceeding; Mrs. Sinclair, just towards the end,
                        tapped Leslie’s arm gently with her fan, and said to him in a whisper, ‘Do
                        you really believe all this?’ 
 When all was over, when the Doctor had solemnly pronounced the last ‘Amen,’
                        he looked about him nervously for a moment, as if the question of how to
                        retire becomingly suddenly dawned upon him. Luckily he perceived almost
                        directly a servant standing in readiness by the curtain. The Doctor frowned
                        slightly at the man; made a slightly impatient gesture at him; and Faust and
                        the young witch again covered the preacher from the eyes of his
                        congregation. 
