
Chapter XLVI
Lucilla's calculations were fully justified by the result. Twenty times in a day she
     recognised the wisdom of her own early decision, which was made while she was still by herself,
     and before anybody had come in to advise her. If she had left it over until the time when,
     though much shaken, she was understood to be able to see her friends, it is just possible that
     the whirlwind of popular opinion which raged about her might have exercised a distracting
     influence even upon Miss Marjoribanks's clear head and steady judgment. For even now, though
     they saw her in her own house, in her mourning, people would not believe that it was true, and
     that Lucilla actually intended to make "no change"; and all that tide of good advice which had
     been flowing through Carlingford ever since the Doctor's death in the form of opinion, now
     rushed in upon her, notwithstanding that all the world knew that she had made up her mind.
     "Everybody says you are going to stay on, but we do hope it is not true, Lucilla," her friends
     said, in many voices. "It is dreadful for us to lose you, but you never could bear it,
     dear." And this was repeated so often that if Miss Marjoribanks had been weak-minded, she must
     have ended by believing not only that it was more than she was equal to, but more than she
     ought to be equal to—which was a more touching argument still.
"You are excited now," Miss Brown said, who had a great deal of experience in family
     troubles; "one always is at such a time; but when things have settled down in their ordinary
     way, then you will find it is more than you can bear. I think it is always best to make a
     change. If you were to travel a little, you know——"
"But, my dear, I am poor," said Lucilla.
"It doesn't require so much money when you know how to set about it," said her adviser; "and
     there are so many people who would be glad to have you, Lucilla! And then you might settle a
     little at Caen or Tours, or some of those nice places, where there is such capital English
     society, and everything so cheap; or, if you thought your health required it, at Pau or Nice,
     you know. You are looking quite pale, and I don't think you were ever very strong in the chest,
     Lucilla; and everything is so different on the Continent—one feels it the moment one
     crosses the Channel; there is something different in the very air."
"It smells different, I know," said Lucilla meekly; and then the conversation was interrupted
     by that afternoon cup of tea, which Nancy could not be got to think was an extravagance, and
     around which, to tell the truth, the Grange Lane ladies began to resume their habit of
     gathering—though Miss Marjoribanks, of course, was still quite unequal to society—as in the old
     times.
"And unless it is for a very short time, Lucilla," Mrs Centum said, who had joined them, "you
     never can keep it up, you know. I could not pretend to afford Nancy, for my part; and
     when a cook is extravagant she may promise as faithfully as you please, and make good
     resolutions, and all that; but when it is in her, Lucilla—I am sure one or two receipts she has
     given me have been quite ridiculous. You don't like to give in, I know, but you'll be driven to
     give in; and if she does not get you into debt as well, you will be very lucky. I know what it
     is. With my family, you know, a week of Nancy would make an end of me."
"And the worst of all is," said Lady Richmond, who had driven in expressly to add her mite to
     the treasure of precious counsel, of which Miss Marjoribanks was making so little use, "that I
     am sure Lucilla is overestimating her strength. She will find after that she is not equal to
     it, you know; all the associations—and the people coming at night to ask for the Doctor—and—and
     all that. I know it would kill me."
"Dear Lady Richmond," said Lucilla, making a desperate stand, and setting, as it were, her
     back against a rock, "don't you think I can bear it best here where you are all so kind to me;
     and where everybody was so fond of—of him? You can't think what a comfort it is to
     me," said Lucilla, with a sob, "to see all the hatbands upon the gentlemen's hats."
And then there was a pause, for this was an argument against which nobody could find anything
     to say.
"For my part, I think the only thing she can do is to take Inmates," said Aunt Jemima. "If I
     were obliged to leave she would be so very lonely. I have known ladies do it who were in a very
     good position, and it made no difference; people visited them all the same. She could say, 'In
     consequence of changes in the family,' or 'A lady who has a larger house than she requires';
     which I am sure is quite true. It goes to one's heart to think of all these bedrooms, and only
     one lady to sleep in them all—when so many people are so hampered for want of room. Or she
     might say, 'For the sake of society'; for, I am sure, if I should have to go away——"
"But I hope you are not going away. It would be so sad for Lucilla to be left alone," said
     Lady Richmond, who took a serious view of everything, "at such a time."
"Oh, no!" Aunt Jemima said, faltering a little; and then a pink blush, which seemed strangely
     uncalled for in such a mild little tea-party, came over her mature countenance; "but then one
     can never tell what may happen. I might have other duties—my son might make a call upon my
     time. Not that I know of anything at present," she added hurriedly, "but I never can bind
     myself on account of Tom——"
And then she caught Lucilla's eye, and grew more confused than ever. What could she have to
     be confused about? If Tom did make a call upon her time, whatever that might mean, there was
     nothing in it to call a blush upon his mother's face. And the fact was, that a letter had come
     from Tom a day or two before, of which, contrary to all her usual habits, Aunt Jemima had taken
     no notice to Lucilla. These were things which would have roused Miss Marjoribanks's curiosity
     if she had been able to think about anything, as she said. But her visitors were taking their
     cup of tea all the time, in a melancholy, half-sympathetic, half-disapproving way, and they
     could not be expected to see anything particularly interesting in Aunt Jemima's blush.
And then Rose Lake came in from Grove Street, who was rather an unusual visitor, and whose
     appearance, though they were all very kind and gracious to her, rather put the others to
     flight; for nobody had ever quite forgotten or forgiven Barbara's brief entrance into society
     and flirtation with Mr Cavendish, which might be said to have been the beginning of all that
     happened to him in Grange Lane. As for Mrs Centum, she took her leave directly, and pressed
     Lucilla's hand, and could not help saying in her ear that she hoped the other was not
     coming back to Carlingford to throw herself in poor Mr Cavendish's way. "It would do him so
     much harm," Mrs Centum said anxiously; "but oh! I forgot, Lucilla, you are on the other
     side."
"I am on no side now," said Miss Marjoribanks, with plaintive meaning; "and Barbara
     was as old as I am, you know, and she must have gone off."
"I have no doubt she has gone off," said Mrs Centum, with righteous indignation. "As old as
     you, Lucilla! She must be ten years older at least; and such a shocking style of looks—if men
     were not so infatuated! And you have not gone off at all, my poor dear," she added, with all
     the warmth of friendship! And then they were joined at the door by the county lady, who was the
     next to go away.
"My dear, I hope you will be guided for the best," Lady Richmond said as she went away; but
     she gave a deep sigh as she kissed Lucilla, and looked as if she had very little faith in the
     efficacy of her own wish. Maria Brown had withdrawn to another part of the drawing-room with
     Aunt Jemima, so that Lucilla was, so to speak, left alone with Rose. And Rose, too, had come
     with the intention of giving advice.
"I hear you are going to stay, Lucilla," she said, "and I did not think I would be doing my
     duty if I did not tell you what was in my mind. I can't do any good to anybody, you
     know; but you who are so clever, and have so much in your power——"
"I am poor now," said Miss Marjoribanks; "and as for being clever, I don't know about that. I
     never was clever about drawing or Art, like you."
"Oh, like me!" said poor little Rose, whose Career had been sacrificed ten years ago, and who
     was a little misanthropical now, and did not believe even in Schools of Design; "I am not so
     sure about the moral influence of Art as I used to be—except High Art, to be sure; but we never
     have any High Art down here. And oh, Lucilla! the poor people do want something done
     for them. If I was as clever as you, and with a great house all to myself like this, and well
     off, and with plenty of influence, and no ties——" said Rose, with energetic emphasis. She made
     a pause there, and she was so much in earnest that the tears came into her eyes. "I would make
     it a House of Mercy, Lucilla! I would show all these poor creatures how to live and how to
     manage, if I was as clever as you; and teach them and their children, and look after them, and
     be a mother to them!" said Rose; and here she stopped short, altogether overcome by her own
     magnificent conception of what her friend could or might do.
Aunt Jemima and Miss Brown, who had drawn near out of curiosity, stared at Rose as if they
     thought she had gone mad; but Lucilla, who was of a larger mind and more enlightened ideas,
     neither laughed nor looked horrified. She did not make a very distinct answer, it is true, but
     she was very kind to her new adviser, and made her a fresh cup of tea, and even consented,
     though in an ambiguous way, to the principle she had just enunciated, "If you won't be
     affronted, my dear," Lucilla said, "I do not think that Art could do very much in Carlingford;
     and I am sure any little thing that I may be of use for——" But she did not commit herself any
     further, and Rose too found the result of her visit unsatisfactory, and went home disappointed
     in Lucilla. This was how the afternoon passed; and at the end of such a day, it may well be
     imagined how Miss Marjoribanks congratulated herself on having made up her mind before the
     public, so to speak, were admitted. For Rose was followed by the Rector, who, though he did not
     propose in so many words a House of Mercy, made no secret of his conviction that parish-work
     was the only thing that could be of any service to Lucilla; and that, in short, such was the
     inevitable and providential destination of a woman who had "no ties." Indeed, to hear Mr Bury,
     a stranger would have been disposed to believe that Dr Marjoribanks had been, as he said,
     "removed," and his fortune swept away, all in order to indicate to Lucilla the proper sphere
     for her energies. In the face of all this it will be seen how entirely Miss Marjoribanks's
     wisdom in making her decision by herself before her advisers broke in upon her, was justified.
     She could now set her back against her rock, and face her assailants, as Fitz-James did.

Come one, come all, this rock shall fly
From its firm base as soon as I,

might have been her utterance; but she was not in a defiant mood. She kissed all her
     counsellors that day (except, of course, the Rector), and heard them out with the sweetest
     patience; and then she thought to herself how much better it was that she had made up her mind
     to take her own way.
Notwithstanding, all this commotion of public opinion about her made a certain impression
     upon Miss Marjoribanks's mind. It was not unpleasant to feel that, for this moment at least,
     she was the centre of the thoughts of the community, and that almost everybody in Carlingford
     had taken the trouble to frame an ideal existence for her, according as he or she regarded
     life. It is so seldom that any one has it in his power, consciously and evidently, to regulate
     his life for himself, and make it whatever he wants it to be. And then, at the same time, the
     best that she could make of it would, after all, be something very limited and unsatisfactory.
     In her musings on this subject, Lucilla could not but go back a great many times to that last
     conversation she had with her father, when she walked up Grange Lane with him that night over
     the thawed and muddy snow. The Doctor had said she was not cut out for a single woman; and
     Lucilla, with candour, yet a certain philosophical speculativeness, had allowed that she was
     not—unless, indeed, she could be very rich. If she had been very rich, the prospect would no
     doubt have been, to a certain extent, different. And then, oddly enough, it was Rose Lake's
     suggestion which came after this to Lucilla's mind. She did not smile at it as some people
     might expect she would. One thing was quite sure, that she had no intention of sinking into a
     nobody, and giving up all power of acting upon her fellow-creatures; and she could not help
     being conscious of the fact that she was able to be of much use to her fellow-creatures. If it
     had been Maria Brown, for instance, who had been concerned, the whole question would have been
     one of utter unimportance, except to the heroine itself; but it was different in Miss
     Marjoribanks's case. The House of Mercy was not a thing to be taken into any serious
     consideration; but still there was something in the idea which Lucilla could not dismiss
     carelessly as her friends could. She had no vocation, such as the foundress of such an
     establishment ought to have, nor did she see her way to the abandonment of all projects for
     herself, and that utter devotion to the cause of humanity which would be involved in it; but
     yet, when a woman happens to be full of energy and spirit, and determined that whatever she may
     be she shall certainly not be a nonentity, her position is one that demands thought. She was
     very capable of serving her fellow-creatures, and very willing and well disposed to serve them;
     and yet she was not inclined to give herself up entirely to them, nor to relinquish her
     personal prospects—vague though these might be. It was a tough problem, and one which might
     have caused a most unusual disturbance in Lucilla's well-regulated mind, had not she remembered
     all at once what deep mourning she was in, and that at present no sort of action, either of one
     kind or another, could be expected of her. There was no need for making a final decision,
     either about the parish-work, or about taking Inmates, as Aunt Jemima proposed, or about any
     other single suggestion which had been offered to her; no more than there was any necessity for
     asking what her cousin Tom's last letter had been about, or why his mother looked so guilty and
     embarrassed when she spoke of him. Grief has its privileges and exemptions, like other great
     principles of life; and the recollection that she could not at present be expected to be able
     to think about anything, filled Lucilla's mind with the most soothing sense of consolation and
     refreshing calm.
And then other events occurred to occupy her friends; the election for one thing began to
     grow a little exciting, and took away some of the superfluous energy of Grange Lane. Mr
     Ashburton had carried all before him at first; but since the Rector had come into the field,
     the balance had changed a little. Mr Bury was very Low-Church; and from the moment at which he
     was persuaded that Mr Cavendish was a great penitent, the question as to which was the Man for
     Carlingford had been solved in his mind in the most satisfactory way. A man who intrenched
     himself in mere respectability, and trusted in his own good character, and considered himself
     to have a clear conscience, and to have done his duty, had no chance against a repentant
     sinner. Mr Cavendish, perhaps, had not done his duty quite so well; but then he was penitent,
     and everything was expressed in that word. The Rector was by no means contemptible, either as
     an adversary or a supporter—and the worst of it was that, in embracing Mr Cavendish's claims,
     he could scarcely help speaking of Mr Ashburton as if he was in a very bad way. And feeling
     began to rise rather high in Carlingford. If anything could have deepened the intensity of Miss
     Marjoribanks's grief, it would have been to know that all this was going on, and that affairs
     might go badly with her candidate, while she was shut up, and could give no aid. It was hard
     upon her, and it was hard upon the candidates themselves—one of whom had thus become generally
     disapproved of, without, so far as he knew, doing anything to deserve it; while the other
     occupied the still more painful character of being on his promotion—a repentant man, with a
     character to keep up. It was no wonder that Mrs Centum grew pale at the very idea of such a
     creature as Barbara Lake throwing herself in poor Mr Cavendish's way. A wrong step one way or
     other—a relapse into the ways of wickedness—might undo in a moment all that it had cost so much
     trouble to do. And the advantage of the Rector's support was thus grievously counterbalanced by
     what might be called the uncertainty of it—especially as Mr Cavendish was not, as his committee
     lamented secretly among themselves, a man of strong will or business habits, in whom implicit
     confidence could be placed. He might get restive, and throw the Rector over just at the
     critical moment; or he might relapse into his lazy Continental habits, and give up church-going
     and other good practices. But still, up to this moment, he had shown very tolerable
     perseverance; and Mr Bury's influence thrown into his scale had equalised matters very much,
     and made the contest very exciting. All this Lucilla heard, not from Mr Cavendish, but from her
     own candidate, who had taken to calling in a steady sort of way. He never went into any
     effusions of sympathy, for he was not that kind of man; but he would shake hands with her, and
     say that people must submit to the decrees of Providence; and then he would speak of the
     election and of his chances. Sometimes Mr Ashburton was despondent, and then Lucilla cheered
     him up; and sometimes he had very good hopes.
"I am very glad you are to be here," he said on one of these occasions. "It would have been a
     great loss to me if you had gone away. I shall never forget our talk about it here
      that day, and how you were the first person that found me out."
"It was not any cleverness of mine," said Lucilla. "It came into my mind in a moment, like
     spirit-rapping, you know. It seems so strange to talk of that now; there have been
     such changes since then—it looks like years."
"Yes," said Mr Ashburton, in his steady way. "There is nothing that really makes time look so
     long; but we must all bow to these dispensations, my dear Miss Marjoribanks. I would not speak
     of the election, but that I thought it might amuse you. The writs are out now, you know, and it
     takes place on Monday week."
Upon which Miss Marjoribanks smiled upon Mr Ashburton, and held out her hands to him with a
     gesture and look which said more than words. "You know you will have all my best
     wishes," she said; and the candidate was much moved—more moved than at such a moment he had
     thought it possible to be.
"If I succeed, I know whom I shall thank the most," he said fervently; and then, as this was
     a climax, and it would have been a kind of bathos to plunge into ordinary details after it, Mr
     Ashburton got up, still holding Lucilla's hand, and clasped it almost tenderly as he said
     good-bye. She looked very well in her mourning, though she had not expected to do so; for black
     was not Lucilla's style. And the fact was, that instead of having gone off, as she herself
     said, Miss Marjoribanks looked better than ever she did, and was even embellished by the
     natural tears which still shone by times in her eyes. Mr Ashburton went out in a kind of
     bewilderment after this interview, and forgot his overcoat in the hall, and had to come back
     for it, which was a confusing circumstance; and then he went on his way with a gentle
     excitement which was not unpleasant. "Would she, I wonder?" he said to himself, as he went up
     Grange Lane. Perhaps he was only asking himself whether Lucilla would or could be present along
     with Lady Richmond and her family at the window of the Blue Boar on the great day; but if that
     was it, the idea had a certain brightening and quickening influence upon his face and his
     movements. The doubt he had on the subject, whatever it was, was not a discouraging, but a
     piquant, stimulating, exciting doubt. He had all but proposed the question to his committee
     when he went in among them, which would have filled these gentlemen with wonder and dismay. But
     though he did not do that, he carried it home with him, as he trotted back to the Firs to
     dinner. Mr Ashburton took a walk through his own house that evening, and examined all its
     capabilities—with no particular motive, as he was at pains to explain to his housekeeper; and
     again he said to himself, "Would she, I wonder?" before he retired for the night; which was no
     doubt an unusual sort of iteration for so sensible a man, and one so fully occupied with the
     most important affairs, to make.
As for Lucilla, she was not in the way of asking herself any questions at that moment. She
     was letting things take their course, and not interfering; and consequently, nothing that
     happened could be said to be her fault. She carried this principle so far, that even when Aunt
     Jemima was herself led to open the subject, in a hesitating way, Miss Marjoribanks never even
     asked a single question about Tom's last letter. She was in mourning, and that was enough for
     her. As for appearing at the window of the Blue Boar with Lady Richmond, if that was what Mr
     Ashburton was curious about, he might have saved himself the trouble of any speculations on the
     subject. For though Miss Marjoribanks would be very anxious about the election, she would
     indeed have been ashamed of herself could her feelings have permitted her to appear anywhere in
     public so soon. Thus, while Mr Ashburton occupied himself much with the question which had
     taken possession of his mind, Lucilla took a good book, which seemed the best reading for her
     in her circumstances, and when she had looked after all her straitened affairs in the morning,
     sat down sweetly in the afternoon quiet of her retirement and seclusion, and let things take
     their way.
