
Chapter XX
Mr Woodburn's house, everybody admitted, was one of the nicest in Carlingford; but that was
     not so visible out of doors as in. He was a great amateur of flowers and fruit, and had his
     garden lined on each side with greenhouses, which were no doubt very fine in their way, but
     somewhat spoiled the garden, which had not in the least the homely, luxuriant, old-fashioned
     look of the other gardens, where, for the most part, the flowers and shrubs grew as if they
     liked it and were at home—whereas Mr Woodburn's flower-beds were occupied only by
     tenants-at-will; but at one corner near the house there was a little arbour, so covered up and
     heaped over with clematis that even the Scotch gardener had not the heart to touch it. The mass
     was so perfect and yet so light that it was the most perfect hiding-place imaginable; and
     nobody who had not been in it could have suspected that there was a possibility of getting
     inside. Here Mrs Woodburn and Mr Cavendish were seated on this particular afternoon; she very
     eager, animated, and in earnest, he silent and leaning his head on his two hands in a sort of
     downcast, fallen way. Mrs Woodburn had one of her lively eyes on the garden that nobody might
     enter unseen, and for this once was "taking off" no one, but was most emphatically and
     unquestionably herself.
"So you did not do it," she said. "Why didn't you do it? when you knew so much depended upon
     it! You know I did not wish for it myself, at first. But now since this man has come, and you
     have got into such a panic, and never will have the courage to face it out——"
"How can I have the courage to face it out?" said Mr Cavendish, with a groan. "It is all very
     easy for a woman to speak who has only to criticise other people. If you had to do it
     yourself——"
"Ah, if I only had!" cried the sister. "You may be sure I would not make so much fuss. After
     all, what is there to do? Take your place in society, which you have worked for and won as
     honestly as anybody ever won it, and look another man in the face who is not half so clever nor
     so sensible as you are. Why, what can he say? If I only could do it, you may be sure I should
     not lose any time."
"Yes," said Mr Cavendish, lifting his head. "To be sure, you're a mimic—you can assume any
     part you like; but I am not so clever. I tell you again, the only thing I can do is to go
     away——"
"Run away, you mean," said Mrs Woodburn. "I should be foolish, indeed, if I were trusting to
     your cleverness to assume a part. My dear good brother, you would find it impossible to put
     yourself sufficiently in sympathy with another," cried the mimic, in the Archdeacon's very
     tone, with a laugh, and at the same time a little snarl of bitter contempt.
"Oh, for Heaven's sake, Nelly, no foolery just now," said Mr Cavendish. "I don't understand
     how you can be so heartless. To mimic a man who has my position, my reputation, my very
     existence in his hands!"
"Have you murdered anybody?" said Mrs Woodburn, with intense scorn. "Have you robbed anybody?
     If you have, I can understand all this stuff. He is the very man to mimic, on the contrary. I'd
     like to let you see him as he was on that famous occasion when he delivered his opinions on art
     in Lucilla's drawing-room. Look here," said the mimic, putting one hand behind an imaginary
     coat tail, and with the other holding up a visionary drawing to the light; but this was more
     than her audience could bear.
"I think you must have vowed to drive me crazy," cried the exasperated brother. "Put aside
     for once that confounded vanity of yours—as if a man had always leisure to look at your playing
     the fool." While he spoke in this unusual way, he got up, as was natural, and took one or two
     steps across the narrow space which was shut in by those luxuriant heaps of clematis; and Mrs
     Woodburn, for her part, withdrew her chair out of his way in equal heat and indignation.
"You have always the leisure to play the fool yourselves, you men," she said. "Vanity,
     indeed! as if it were not simply to show you that one can laugh at him without being stricken
     with thunder. But leave that if you like. You know quite well if you married Lucilla
     Marjoribanks that there would be no more about it. There could be no more about it.
     Why, all Grange Lane would be in a sort of way pledged to you. I don't mean to say I
     am attached to Lucilla, but you used to be, or to give yourself out for being. You flirted with
     her dreadfully in the winter, I remember, when those terrible Woodburns were here," she
     continued, with a shiver. "If you married Lucilla and got into Parliament, you might laugh at
     all the archdeacons in the world."
"It is very easy for a woman to talk," said the reluctant wooer again.
"I can tell you something it is not easy to do," cried his sister. "It is frightfully hard
     for a woman to stand by and see a set of men making a mess of things, and not to dare to say a
     word till all is spoiled. What is this Archdeacon, I would like to know, or what could he say?
     If you only would have the least courage, and look him in the face, he would be disabled. As if
     no one had ever heard of mistaken identity before? And in the meantime go and see Lucilla, and
     get her consent. I can't do that for you; but I could do a great deal of the rest, if you would
     only have a little pluck and not give in like this."
"A little pluck, by George!" cried the unfortunate man, and he threw himself down
     again upon his chair. "I am not in love with Lucilla Marjoribanks, and I don't want to marry
     her," he added doggedly, and sat beating a tune with his fingers on the table, with but a
     poorly-assumed air of indifference. As for Mrs Woodburn, she regarded him with a look of
     contempt.
"Perhaps you will tell me who you are in love with," she said disdainfully; "but I did not
     ask to be taken into your confidence in such an interesting way. What I wish to know is,
     whether you want a wife who will keep your position for you. I am not in the least fond of her,
     but she is very clever. Whether you want the support of all the best people in Carlingford, and
     connections that would put all that to silence, and a real position of your own which
     nobody could interfere with—that is what I want to know, Harry; as for the sentimental part, I
     am not so much interested about that," said Mrs Woodburn, with a contemptuous smile. She was
     young still, and she was handsome in her way (for people who liked that style), and it jarred a
     little on the natural feelings to hear a young wife express herself so disdainfully; but, to be
     sure, her brother was not unaccustomed to that.
"You said once that Woodburn was necessary to your happiness," he said, with a mixture of
     scorn and appeal, "though I can't say I saw it, for my part."
"Did I?" she said, with a slight shrug of her shoulders; "I saw what was necessary on another
     score, as you don't seem to do. When a man has nobody belonging to him, it is connections he
     ought to try for: and Lucilla has very good connections; and it would be as good as securing
     the support of Grange Lane. Do it for my sake, Harry, if you won't do it for your own," said
     Mrs Woodburn, with a change of tone. "If you were to let things be said, and give people an
     advantage, think what would become of me. Woodburn would not mind so much if somebody else were
     involved; but oh, Harry! if he should find out he had been cheated, and he only——"
"He was not cheated! You were always a great deal too good for him, Nelly," said Mr
     Cavendish, touched at last at an effectual point; "and as for his friends and family,
     and all that——"
"Oh, please, don't speak of them," said Mrs Woodburn, with a shudder; "but there are only two
     of us in the world; and, Harry, for my sake——"
At this appeal Mr Cavendish got up again, and began to pace the little arbour, two steps to
     the wall, and two steps back again. "I told you I had almost done it, when that confounded old
     woman came in," he said: "that could not be called my fault?"
"And she said she was both your grandmothers," said the mimic, with a slightly hysterical
     laugh, in Mrs Chiley's voice. "I know how she did it. She can't be there still, you know—go now
     and try."
"Let alone a little; don't hurry a fellow," said her brother, somewhat sullenly; "a man can't
     move himself up to the point of proposing twice in one day."
"Then promise that you will do it to-morrow," said Mrs Woodburn. "I shall have to go in, for
     there is somebody coming. Harry, before I go, promise that you will do it to-morrow, for my
     sake."
"Oh, bother!" said Mr Cavendish; and it was all the answer he deigned to give before Mrs
     Woodburn was called away, notwithstanding the adjuration she addressed to him. It was then
     getting late, too late, even had he been disposed for such an exertion, to try his fortunes
     again that day, and Lucilla's allusion had given him a great longing to see Barbara once more
     before his sacrifice was accomplished. Not that it was such a great sacrifice, after all. For
     Mr Cavendish was quite aware that Miss Marjoribanks was a far more suitable match for him than
     Barbara Lake, and he was not even disposed to offer himself and his name and fortune, such as
     they were, to the drawing-master's daughter. But, to tell the truth, he was not a person of
     fixed and settled sentiments, as he ought to have been in order to triumph, as his sister
     desired, over the difficulties of his position. Perhaps Mrs Woodburn herself would have done
     just the same, had it been she from whom action was demanded. But she was capable of much more
     spirited and determined conduct in theory, as was natural, and thought she could have done a
     great deal better, as so many women do.
Mr Cavendish lounged about the garden a little, with his hands in his pockets, and then
     strayed out quite accidentally, and in the same unpremeditating mood made his way to Grove
     Street. He meant nothing by it, and did not even inquire of himself where he was going, but
     only strolled out to take the air a little. And it was better to go up to the higher parts of
     the town than to linger here about Grange Lane, where all the people he knew might pass, and
     stop to talk and ask him where he had been, and worry his life out. And surely he had had
     enough of bother for one day. By this time it was getting dark, and it was very pleasant in
     Grove Street, where most of the good people had just watered their little gardens, and brought
     out the sweetness of the mignonette. Mr Cavendish was not sentimental, but still the hour was
     not without its influence; and when he looked at the lights that began to appear in the parlour
     windows, and breathed in the odours from the little gardens, it is not to be denied that he
     asked himself for a moment what was the good of going through all this bother and vexation, and
     whether love in a cottage, with a little garden full of mignonette and a tolerable amount of
     comfort within, was not, after all, a great deal more reasonable than it looked at first sight?
     This, however, it must be allowed, was no conclusion arrived at on sufficient premises, and
     with the calmness that befitted such an important argument, but the mere suggestion, by the
     way, of an impatient, undecided mind, that did always what at the moment it found most
     agreeable to do, and reflected afterwards, when the moment of repentance, not of reflection,
     had arrived.
He had paused by instinct under a lamp not yet lighted, which was almost opposite Mr Lake's
     house; and it was not his fault if he saw at the upper window a figure looking out, like
     Mariana, and sighing, "He cometh not." Naturally the figure was concerned to find out who he
     was, and he was anxious to find out who was the figure. And, on the whole, it was in a
     very innocent manner that this entirely natural curiosity was satisfied. First the window was
     opened a little—a very little, just enough to change the air—and Mr Cavendish down below heard
     the voice of Barbara singing softly up above, which settled the matter as to her identity. As
     to his, Barbara had never, from the first moment she perceived him, any doubt of that.
     Her heart leaped back, as she thought, to its right place when she first caught sight of that
     blessed apparition; and with her heart came the orange-flowers, and the wedding breakfast, and
     the veil of real Brussels for which Barbara had so much wept. She tried to sing something that
     would convey hope and assurance to her timid lover, according to romantic precedent; but her
     mind was far from being a prompt one, as has been said. Thus it was all in the most natural way
     that it came about. When Mr Cavendish felt quite sure who it was, he took off his hat, which
     was only civil, and made a step or two forward; and then Barbara took the extreme step of going
     down to the door. No doubt it was an extreme step. Nothing but a great public aim, like that of
     Miss Marjoribanks, could have justified such a measure; but then Barbara, if she had not a
     great public, had at least a decided personal, purpose, and obeyed the impulse of that mingled
     inclination towards another and determination to have her own way, which in such a mind calls
     itself passion, and which sometimes, by sheer force of will, succeeds better than either genius
     or calculation. She went down to the door, all palpitating with renewed hope, and, at the same
     time, with the dread that he might escape her in the moment which was necessary for her passage
     downstairs. But when she opened the door and appeared with her cheeks glowing, and her eyes
     blazing, and her heart thumping in her breast, in the midst of that quiet twilight, the object
     of her hopes was still there. He had even advanced a little, with an instinctive sense of her
     approach; and thus they met, the street being comparatively quiet just then, and the mignonette
     perfuming the air. To be sure, the poetry of the situation was of a homely order, for it was
     under a lamp-post instead of a tree that the lover had placed himself; and it was not the dew,
     but the watering, that had brought out the odour of the mignonette; but then neither of the two
     were very poetical personages, and the accessories did perfectly well for them.
"Is it you, Mr Cavendish? Goodness! I could not think who it was," cried Barbara, out of
     breath.
"Yes, it is I. I thought, if I had an opportunity, I would ask how you were—before I go away
     again," said the imprudent man. He did not want to commit himself, but at the same time he was
     disposed to take the benefit of his position as a hero on the eve of departure. "I heard you
     had been ill."
"Oh, no—not ill," said Barbara; and then she added, taking breath, "I am quite well now.
     Won't you come in?"
This was the perfectly simple and natural manner in which it occurred. There was nobody in,
     and Barbara did not see, any more than her lover did, why she should sacrifice any of her
     advantages. They were, on the whole, quite well matched, and stood in need of no special
     protection on either side. Though naturally Barbara, who felt by this time as if she could
     almost see the pattern of the real Brussels, had a much more serious object in view than Mr
     Cavendish, who went in only because it was a pleasant thing to do at the moment, and offered
     him a little refuge from himself and his deliberations, and the decision which it was so
     necessary to come to. Thus it happened that when Mr Lake and Rose came in from the evening walk
     they had been taking together, they found, to their great amazement, Barbara in the little
     parlour, singing to Mr Cavendish, who had forgotten all about Grange Lane, and his dangers, and
     his hopes of better fortune, and was quite as much contented with the mellow contralto that
     delighted his ears, and the blazing scarlet bloom, and black level brows that pleased his eyes,
     as anybody could have desired. To be sure, he had not even yet given a thought to the wedding
     breakfast, which was all arranged already in the mind of the enchantress who thus held him in
     thrall; but perhaps that may be best accounted for by referring it to one of those indefinable
     peculiarities of difference that exist between the mind of woman and that of man.
When Mr Lake and his daughter came in from their walk, and their talk about Willie, and about
     art, and about the "effects" and "bits" which Rose and her father mutually pointed out to each
     other, to find this unexpected conjunction in the parlour, their surprise, and indeed
     consternation, may be imagined. But it was only in the mind of Rose that the latter sentiment
     existed. As for Mr Lake, he had long made up his mind how, as he said, "a man of superior
     position" ought to be received when he made his appearance in an artist's house. Perhaps, to
     tell the truth, he forgot for the moment that his visitor was young, and his daughter very
     handsome, and that it was to visit Barbara and not himself that Mr Cavendish had come. The
     little drawing-master would not suffer himself to be seduced by thoughts which were apart from
     the subject from carrying out his principles. When Mr Cavendish rose up confused, with a look
     of being caught and found out, Mr Lake held out his hand to him with perfect suavity—"I have
     the pleasure of knowing you only by sight," said the innocent father, "but I am very glad to
     make your acquaintance in my own house;" and as this was said with the conscious dignity of a
     man who knows that his house is not just an ordinary house, but one that naturally the
     patrician portion of the community, if they only knew it, would be glad to seek admittance to,
     the consequence was that Mr Cavendish felt only the more and more confused.
"I happened to be passing," he explained faintly, "and having heard that Miss Lake, whom I
     have had the pleasure of meeting——"
"I assure you," said the drawing-master, "that I hail with satisfaction the appearance of a
     gentleman whose intelligence I have heard so much of. We artists are a little limited, to be
     sure; for life, you know, is short, and art is long, as the poet says; and our own occupation
     requires so much of our thoughts. But still we are sympathetic, Mr Cavendish. We can understand
     other subjects of study, though we cannot share them. Yes, Barbara has been a little poorly—but
     she does not look as if there was much the matter with her to-night. Ask for the lamp, Rose,"
     said Mr Lake, with a little grandeur. There was no light in the room except the candles at the
     piano, which lighted that corner and left the rest of the apartment, small as it was, in
     comparative shade. There was something magnificent in the idea of adding the lamp to that
     illumination; but then it is true that, as Mr Lake himself said, "every artist is a prodigal in
     his heart."
Rose had been standing all this time with her hat on, looking at Mr Cavendish like a little
     Gorgon. What did he want here? How had he been admitted? She scorned to go and interrogate the
     maid, which involved a kind of infidelity to her sister, but all the same she looked hard at Mr
     Cavendish with a severity which had, on the whole, a reassuring effect upon him. For, to tell
     the truth, the benign reception which he was receiving from Mr Lake, instead of setting the
     visitor at his ease, made him nervous; for he was not in the least aware of the heroic soul
     which existed in the drawing-master's limited person. Mr Cavendish thought nothing but that he
     was being "caught," according to his own vulgar theory. He thought Barbara's father was
     cringing to him, and playing the usual mean part of an interested parent who means to secure a
     good match for his daughter. But as for Rose, she evidently, either from jealousy or some other
     reason, was not in the plot. She stood apart and scowled, as well as she knew how, upon the
     intruder. "I suppose, papa," said Rose, "Mr Cavendish wished to hear Barbara sing, and she has
     been singing. She is always very good-natured in that way; but as we have none of us anything
     particular to do, I don't see what need we have for a lamp."
At this trenchant speech Mr Cavendish rose. He was quite grateful to the little Preraphaelite
     for her incivility. It made him feel less as if he had committed himself, and more as if he
     were an intruder, which was the more agreeable suggestion of the two under the present
     circumstances. "You remind me that I should thank Miss Lake for letting me come in and hear
     once more her lovely voice," he said. "I am at present only a visitor in Carlingford, and
     indeed in England—I may have to leave again in a day or two—good-bye. If I am still here, I
     shall hope to meet you on Thursday." And then he pressed Barbara's hand, who, to tell the
     truth, was very reluctant to let him go away.
"If you must go——" she said, so low that her father could not hear her, though the vigilant,
     suspicious little Rose caught the sound, and came a step nearer, like a little dragon, as
     Barbara was disposed to think she was.
"I must go," murmured Mr Cavendish; "but I shall see you—we shall meet." He dared
     not say another word, so alarming were the looks of the small Medusa, whose countenance he
     could see behind Barbara regarding the parting. As for Mr Lake, he too regarded it with a
     momentary curiosity. He did not quite understand how it was that his daughter and his visitor
     could know each other well enough to communicate in this undertone.
"I am sorry to see so little of you," said Mr Lake. "I am afraid it is my little girl's
      brusque way of speaking that hastens your going. I assure you we were quite
     unoccupied, and would have been very happy—perhaps we may be more fortunate another time;" and
     with that the drawing-master gave a dignified dismissal to his surprising visitor. It was Rose
     herself who saw Mr Cavendish to the door, which she opened for him with an utter disregard of
     his excuses and attempts to do that office for himself. She would not even shake hands, but
     made him the most majestic curtsey that was ever executed by a personage five feet high, under
     the influence of which Mr Cavendish went away humbled, and, he could scarcely tell why, ashamed
     of himself. When Rose came back to the parlour, still with her hat on, she found that Barbara
     had gone to the window, and was looking out at the edge of the blind—which was all that was
     wanted to put a climax to her sister's exasperation.
"Papa," said Rose, "I should like to know in your presence, or I should like you to ask
     Barbara herself, what is the meaning of all that has been going on to-night."
Mr Lake turned right round at this appeal with an expression of utter amaze and bewilderment,
     which at another moment would have struck Rose with the profoundest delight as a study; and as
     for Barbara, without any more ado she burst into a flood of passionate tears.
"Oh, you nasty, envious thing! oh, you jealous, disagreeable thing!" sobbed the elder sister;
     "to send him away and spoil everything with your airs! when he was as near—just as near"—but
     here Barbara's voice lost itself in her tears.
"My dear, what does this mean?" said Mr Lake.
"It means, papa, that she has encouraged him to come, and invited him in, and been singing to
     him," cried Rose. "To think she should be one of us, and have no proper pride! If he was fond
     of her, he would tell her so, and ask your permission; but she is laying herself out to please
      him, and is content that they should all jeer at her in Lucilla's parties, and say
     she is trying to catch him. I thought I could have died of shame when I saw him here to-night;
     and compromising you, as if that was why you were so civil. If it were for her good, do you
     think I would ever interfere?" cried Barbara's guardian angel. At this point Rose
     herself would have liked excessively to cry, if the truth must be told; but Barbara had already
     appropriated that facile mode of expression, and the little artist scorned to copy. As for Mr
     Lake, he turned from one to the other of his daughters with unmitigated consternation and
     dismay.
"It was all your coming in," sobbed Barbara, "if you had only had the sense to see it.
      That was what he meant. If I was singing, it was just to pass the time; I know that
     was what he came for. And you to send him away with your airs!" cried the injured young woman.
     All this made up a scene entirely novel to the amazed father, who felt it his duty to put a
     stop to it, and yet could not tell what to say.
"Girls," he began, with a trembling voice, "this is all perfectly new to me. I don't
     understand. If Mr Cavendish, or—or any one, wishes to pay his addresses to my daughter, it is,
     of course, his business to apply to me in the first place. Barbara, don't cry. You know how I
     dislike to hear you cry," said the poor man, gradually losing his head. "Don't make a fuss,
     Rose; for Heaven's sake, girls, can't you say at once what you mean, and don't worry me to
     death? Ah, if your poor mother had but been spared!" cried the unfortunate widower; and he had
     five daughters altogether, poor soul!—and it was so easy to drive him out of his senses. At
     this point Rose intervened, and did what she could to calm matters down. Barbara, still
     sobbing, retired to her chamber; the boys came in from their cricket, and the little children
     had to be put to bed; and there was no one to attend to all these matters, in the absence of
     the eldest sister, except the little mistress of the School of Design, so that naturally all
     further explanation was postponed for this night.
