
Chapter XLIII
The talk of this evening might not have been considered of any importance to speak of, but
     for the extraordinary and most unlooked-for event which startled all Carlingford next morning.
     Nobody could believe that it was true. Dr Marjoribanks's patients waited for him, and declared
     to their nurses that it was all a made-up story, and that he would come and prove that he was
     not dead. How could he be dead? He had been as well as he ever was that last evening. He had
     gone down Grange Lane in the snow, to see the poor old lady who was now sobbing in her bed, and
     saying it was all a mistake, and that it was she who ought to have died. But all those
     protestations were of no avail against the cold and stony fact which had frightened Thomas out
     of his senses, when he went to call the Doctor. He had died in the night without calling or
     disturbing anybody. He must have felt faint, it seemed, for he had got up and taken a little
     brandy, the remains of which still stood on the table by his bedside; but that was all that
     anybody could tell about it. They brought Dr Rider, of course; but all that he could do was to
     examine the strong, still frame—old, and yet not old enough to be weakly, or to explain such
     sudden extinction—which had ceased its human functions. And then the news swept over
     Carlingford like a breath of wind, though there was no wind even on that silent snowy day to
     carry the matter. Dr Marjoribanks was dead. It put the election out of people's heads, and even
     their own affairs for the time being; for had he not known all about the greater part of
     them—seen them come into the world and kept them in it—and put himself always in the breach
     when the pale Death approached that way? He had never made very much boast of his friendliness
     or been large in sympathetic expressions, but yet he had never flinched at any time, or
     deserted his patients for any consideration. Carlingford was sorry, profoundly sorry, with that
     true sorrow which is not so much for the person mourned as for the mourner's self, who feels a
     sense of something lost. The people said to themselves, Whom could they ever find who would
     know their constitutions so well, and who was to take care of So-and-so if he had another
     attack? To be sure Dr Rider was at hand, who felt a little agitated about it, and was conscious
     of the wonderful opening, and was very ready to answer, "I am here;" but a young doctor is
     different from an old one, and a living man all in commonplace health and comfort is not to be
     compared with a dead one, on the morning at least of his sudden ending. Thank Heaven, when a
     life is ended there is always that hour or two remaining to set straight the defective balances
     and do a hasty late justice to the dead, before the wave sweeps on over him and washes out the
     traces of his steps, and lets in the common crowd to make their thoroughfare over the
     grave.
"It cannot be the Doctor," Mrs Chiley said, sobbing in her bed, "or else it has been in
     mistake for me. He was always a healthy man, and never had anything the matter with him—and a
     great deal younger than we are, you know. If anything has happened to him it must have been in
     mistake for me," said the poor old lady, and she was so hysterical that they had to send for Dr
     Rider, and she was thus the first to begin to build the new world on the foundations of the
     old, little as she meant it. But for the moment everything was paralysed in Grange Lane, and
     canvassing came to a standstill, and nothing was discussed but Dr Marjoribanks—how he was dead,
     though nobody could or would believe it; and how Lucilla would be left, and who her trustees
     were, and how the place could ever get used to the want of him, or would ever look like itself
     again without his familiar presence. It was by way of relieving their minds from the horror of
     the idea, that the good people rushed into consultations what Lucilla would do. It took their
     minds a little off the ghastly imagination of that dark room with the snow on the window, and
     the late moonlight trying to get into the darkness, and the white rigid face inside, as he was
     said to have been found. It could not but make a terrible change to her—indeed, through her it
     could not but make a great change to everybody. The Doctor's house would, of course, be shut
     up, which had been the most hospitable house in Carlingford, and things would drop into the
     unsatisfactory state they used to be in before Miss Marjoribanks's time, and there would no
     longer be anybody to organise society. Such were the ideas the ladies of Grange Lane relapsed
     into by way of delivering themselves from the pain of their first realisation of what had
     happened. It would make a great change. Even the election and its anticipated joys could not
     but change character in some respects at least, and there would be nobody to make the best of
     them; and then the question was, What would Lucilla do? Would she have strength to "make an
     effort," as some people suggested; or would she feel not only her grief, but her downfall, and
     that she was now only a single woman, and sink into a private life, as some others were
     inclined to believe?
Inside the house, naturally, the state of affairs was sad enough. Lucilla, notwithstanding
     the many other things she had had to occupy her mind, was fond of her father, and the shock
     overwhelmed her for the moment. Though she was not the kind of woman to torture herself with
     thinking of things that she might have done, still at the first moment the idea that she ought
     not to have left him alone—that she should have sat up and watched or taken some extraordinary,
     unusual precaution—was not to be driven away from her mind. The reign of reason was eclipsed in
     her as it often is in such an emergency. She said it was her fault in the first horror. "When I
     saw how he was looking, and how he was talking, I should never have left him," said Lucilla,
     which indeed was a very natural thing to say, but would have been an utterly impossible one to
     carry out, as she saw when she came to think of it. But she could not think of it just then.
     She did not think at all that first long snowy, troubled day, but went about the house, on the
     bedroom floor, wringing her hands like a creature distracted. "If I had only sat up," she said;
     and then she would recall the touch of his hand on her shoulder, which she seemed still to be
     feeling, and cry out, like all the rest of the world, that it could not be true. But, to be
     sure, that was a state of feeling that could not last long. There are events for which
     something higher than accident must be held accountable, were one ever so ready to take the
     burden of affairs on one's own shoulders; and Lucilla knew, when she came to herself, that if
     she had watched ever so long or so closely, that could have had no effect upon the matter.
     After a while, the bewildering sense of her own changed position began to come upon her, and
     roused her up into that feverish and unnatural activity of thought which, in some minds, is the
     inevitable reaction after the unaccustomed curb and shock of grief. When she had got used to
     that dreadful certainty about her father, and had suddenly come with a leap to the knowledge
     that she was not to blame, and could not help it, and that though he was gone,
      she remained, it is no censure upon Lucilla to say that her head became immediately
     full of a horror and confusion of thoughts, an involuntary stir and bustle of plans and
     projects which she did all she could to put down, but which would return and overwhelm her
     whether she chose it or not. She could not help asking herself what her new position was,
     thinking it over, so strangely free and new and unlimited as it seemed. And it must be
     recollected that Miss Marjoribanks was a woman of very active mind and great energies, too old
     to take up a girl's fancy that all was over because she had encountered a natural grief on her
     passage, and too young not to see a long future still before her. She kept her room, as was to
     be expected, and saw nobody, and only moved the household and superintended the arrangements in
     a muffled way through Thomas, who was an old servant, and knew "the ways" of the house; but
     notwithstanding her seclusion and her honest sorrow, and her perfect observance of all the
     ordinary restraints of the moment, it would be wrong to omit all mention of this feverish
     bustle of thinking which came into Lucilla's mind in her solitude. Of all that she had to bear,
     it was the thing that vexed and irritated and distressed her the most—as if, she said to
     herself indignantly, she ought to have been able to think of anything! And the chances are that
     Lucilla, for sheer duty's sake, would have said, if anybody had asked, that of course she had
     not thought of anything as yet; without being aware that the mere shock, and horror, and
     profound commotion had a great deal more to do than anything else in producing that fluttering
     crowd of busy, vexatious speculations which had come, without any will of hers, into her
     heart.
It looked a dreadful change in one way as she looked at it, without wishing to look at it, in
     the solitude of her own room, where the blinds were all down, and the snow sometimes came with
     a little thump against the window, and where it was so dark that it was a comfort when night
     came, and the lamp could be lighted. So far as Carlingford was concerned, it would be almost as
     bad for Miss Marjoribanks as if she were her father's widow instead of his daughter. To keep up
     a position of social importance in a single woman's house, unless, as she had herself lightly
     said so short a time since, she were awfully rich, would be next to impossible. All that gave
     importance to the centre of society—the hospitable table, the open house—had come to an end
     with the Doctor. Things could no more be as they had once been, in that respect at least. She
     might stay in the house, and keep up to the furthest extent possible to her its old traditions;
     but even to the utmost limit to which Lucilla could think it right to go it could never be the
     same. This consciousness kept gleaming upon her as she sat in the dull daylight behind the
     closed blinds, with articles of mourning piled about everywhere, and the gray dimness getting
     into her very eyes, and her mind distressed by the consciousness that she ought to have been
     unable to think; and the sadness of the prospect altogether was enough to stir up a reaction,
     in spite of herself, in Miss Marjoribanks's mind.
And on the other side she would no doubt be very well off, and could go wherever she liked,
     and had no limit, except what was right and proper and becoming, to what she might please to
     do. She might go abroad if she liked, which perhaps is the first idea of the modern English
     mind when anything happens to it, and settle wherever she pleased, and arrange her mode of
     existence as seemed good in her own eyes. She would be an heiress in a moderate way, and Aunt
     Jemima was by this time absolutely at her disposal, and could be taken anywhere; and at
     Lucilla's age it was quite impossible to predict what might not happen to a woman in such a
     position. When these fairer possibilities gleamed into Lucilla's mind, it would be difficult to
     describe the anger and self-disgust with which she reproached herself—for perhaps it was the
     first time that she had consciously failed in maintaining a state of mind becoming the
     occasion; and though nobody but herself knew of it, the pain of the accusation was acute and
     bitter. But how could Miss Marjoribanks help it?—the mind travels so much quicker than anything
     else, and goes so far, and makes its expeditions in such subtle, stealthy ways. She might begin
     by thinking of her dear papa, and yet, before she could dry her eyes, might be off in the midst
     of one of these bewildering speculations. For everything was certain now so far as he was
     concerned; and everything was so uncertain, and full of such unknown issues for herself. Thus
     the dark days before the funeral passed by—and everybody was very kind. Dr Marjoribanks was one
     of the props of the place, and all Carlingford bestirred itself to do him the final honours;
     and all her friends conspired how to save Lucilla from all possible trouble, and help her over
     the trial; and to see how much he was respected was the greatest of all possible comforts to
     her, as she said.
Thus it was that among the changes that everybody looked for, there occurred all at once this
     change which was entirely unexpected, and put everything else out of mind for the moment. For
     to tell the truth, Dr Marjoribanks was one of the men who, according to external appearance,
     need never have died. There was nothing about him that wanted to be set right, no sort of loss,
     or failure, or misunderstanding, so far as anybody could see. An existence in which he could
     have his friends to dinner every week, and a good house, and good wine, and a very good table,
     and nothing particular to put him out of his way, seemed in fact the very ideal of the best
     life for the Doctor. There was nothing in him that seemed to demand anything better, and it was
     confusing to try to follow him into that which, no doubt, must be in all its fundamentals a
     very different kind of world. He was a just man and a good man in his way, and had been kind to
     many people in his lifetime—but still he did not seem to have that need of another rectifying,
     completer existence which most men have. There seemed no reason why he should die—a man who was
     so well contented with this lower region in which many of us fare badly, and where so few of us
     are contented. This was a fact which exercised a very confusing influence, even when they
     themselves were not aware of it, on many people's minds. It was hard to think of him under any
     other circumstances, or identify him with angels and spirits—which feeling on the whole made
     the regret for him a more poignant sort of regret.
And they buried him with the greatest signs of respect. People from twenty miles off sent
     their carriages, and all the George Street people shut their shops, and there was very little
     business done all day. Mr Cavendish and Mr Ashburton walked side by side at the funeral, which
     was an affecting sight to see; and if anything more could have been done to show their respect
     which was not done, the corporation of Carlingford would have been sorry for it. And the snow
     still lay deep in all the corners, though it had been trampled down all about the Doctor's
     house, where the lamp was not lighted now of nights; for what was the use of lighting the lamp,
     which was a kind of lighthouse in its way, and meant to point out succour and safety for the
     neighbours, when the physician himself was lying beyond all hope of succour or aid? And all the
     Grange Lane people retired in a sympathetic, awe-stricken way, and decided, or at least the
     ladies did, to see Lucilla next day, if she was able to see them, and to find out whether she
     was going to make an effort, or what she meant to do. And Mrs Chiley was so much better that
     she was able to be up a little in the evening, though she scarcely could forgive herself, and
     still could not help thinking that it was she who had really been sent for, and that the Doctor
     had been taken in mistake. And as for Lucilla, she sat in her room and cried, and thought of
     her father's hand upon her shoulder—that last unusual caress which was more touching to think
     of than a world of words. He had been fond of her and proud of her, and at the last moment he
     had showed it. And by times she seemed to feel again that lingering touch, and cried as if her
     heart would break: and yet, for all that, she could not keep her thoughts steady, nor prevent
     them from wandering to all kinds of profane out-of-door matters, and to considerations of the
     future, and estimates of her own position. It wounded her sadly to feel herself in such an
     inappropriate state of mind, but she could not help it; and then the want of natural light and
     air oppressed her sorely, and she longed for the evening, which felt a little more natural, and
     thought that at last she might have a long talk with Aunt Jemima, who was a kind of refuge in
     her present loneliness, and gave her a means of escape at the same time from all this bustle
     and commotion of unbecoming thoughts.
This was enough surely for any one to have to encounter at one time; but that very night
     another rumour began to murmur through Carlingford—a rumour more bewildering, more incredible
     still, than that of the Doctor's death, which the town had been obliged to confirm and
     acknowledge, and put its seal to. When the thing was first mentioned, everybody (who could find
     it in their heart to laugh) laughed loud in the face of the first narrator with mingled
     scepticism and indignation. They asked him what he meant by it, and ridiculed and scoffed at
     him to his face. "Lucilla will be the richest woman in Grange Lane," people said; "everybody in
     Carlingford knows that." But after this statement had been made, the town began to listen. It
     was obliged to listen, for other witnesses came in to confirm the story. It never might have
     been found out while the Doctor lived, for he had a great practice, and made a great deal of
     money; but now that he was dead, nothing could be hid. He was dead, and he had made an
     elaborate will, which was all as just and righteous as a will could be; but after the will was
     read, it was found out that everything named in it had disappeared like a bubble. Instead of
     being the richest, Dr Marjoribanks was one of the poorest men in Carlingford when he shut his
     door behind him on that snowy night. It was a revelation which took the town perfectly by
     storm, and startled everybody out of their senses. Lucilla's plans, which she thought so
     wicked, went out all of a sudden, in a certain dull amaze and dismay, to which no words could
     give any expression. Such was the second inconceivable reverse of fortune which happened to
     Miss Marjoribanks, more unexpected, more incomprehensible still than the other, in the very
     midst of her most important activities and hopes.
