
CHAPTER XLI.
AT PEACE.
Two years have passed since the May twilight in which Robert found his old friend; and Mr.
     Audley's dream of a fairy cottage has been realized between Teddington Locks and Hampton
     Bridge, where, amid a little forest of foliage, there is a fantastical dwelling place of rustic
     woodwork, whose latticed windows look out upon the river. Here, among the lilies and the rushes
     on the sloping bank, a brave boy of eight years old plays with a toddling baby, who peers
     wonderingly from his nurse's arms at that other baby in the purple depth of the quiet
     water.
Mr. Audley is a rising man upon the home circuit by this time, and has distinguished himself
     in the great breach of promise case of Hobbs v. Nobbs, and has convulsed the court by
     his deliciously comic rendering of the faithless Nobb's amatory correspondence. The handsome
     dark-eyed boy is Master George Talboys, who declines musa at Eton, and fishes for
     tadpoles in the clear water under the spreading umbrage beyond the ivied walls of the academy.
     But he comes very often to the fairy cottage to see his father, who lives there with his sister
     and his sister's husband; and he is very happy with his Uncle Robert, his Aunt Clara, and the
     pretty baby who has just begun to toddle on the smooth lawn that slopes down to the water's
     brink, upon which there is a little Swiss boat-house and landing-stage where Robert and George
     moor their slender wherries.
Other people come to the cottage near Teddington. A bright, merry-hearted girl, and a
     gray-bearded gentleman, who has survived the trouble of his life, and battled with it as a
     Christian should.
It is more than a year since a black-edged letter, written upon foreign paper, came to Robert
     Audley, to announce the death of a certain Madame Taylor, who had expired peacefully at
     Villebrumeuse, dying after a long illness, which Monsieur Val describes as a maladie de
      langueur.
Another visitor comes to the cottage in this bright summer of 1861—a frank, generous hearted
     young man, who tosses the baby and plays with Georgey, and is especially great in the
     management of the boats, which are never idle when Sir Harry Towers is at Teddington.
There is a pretty rustic smoking-room over the Swiss boat-house, in which the gentlemen sit
     and smoke in the summer evenings, and whence they are summoned by Clara and Alicia to drink
     tea, and eat strawberries and cream upon the lawn.
Audley Court is shut up, and a grim old housekeeper reigns paramount in the mansion which my
     lady's ringing laughter once made musical. A curtain hangs before the pre-Raphaelite portrait;
     and the blue mold which artists dread gathers upon the Wouvermans and Poussins, the Cuyps and
     Tintorettis. The house is often shown to inquisitive visitors, though the baronet is not
     informed of that fact, and people admire my lady's rooms, and ask many questions about the
     pretty, fair-haired woman who died abroad.
Sir Michael has no fancy to return to the familiar dwelling-place in which he once dreamed a
     brief dream of impossible happiness. He remains in London until Alicia shall be Lady Towers,
     when he is to remove to a house he has lately bought in Hertfordshire, on the borders of his
     son-in-law's estate. George Talboys is very happy with his sister and his old friend. He is a
     young man yet, remember, and it is not quite impossible that he may, by-and-by, find some one
     who will console him for the past. That dark story of the past fades little by little every
     day, and there may come a time in which the shadow my lady's wickedness has cast upon the young
     man's life will utterly vanish away.
The meerschaum and the French novels have been presented to a young Templar with whom Robert
     Audley had been friendly in his bachelor days; and Mrs. Maloney has a little pension, paid her
     quarterly, for her care of the canaries and geraniums.
I hope no one will take objection to my story because the end of it leaves the good people
     all happy and at peace. If my experience of life has not been very long, it has at least been
     manifold; and I can safely subscribe to that which a mighty king and a great philosopher
     declared, when he said, that neither the experience of his youth nor of his age had ever shown
     him "the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread."
THE END.
