
CHAPTER VII.
AFTER A YEAR.
The first year of George Talboys' widowhood passed away, the deep band of crepe about his hat
     grew brown and dusty, and as the last burning day of another August faded out, he sat smoking
     cigars in the quiet chambers of Figtree Court, much as he had done the year before, when the
     horror of his grief was new to him, and every object in life, however trifling or however
     important, seemed saturated with his one great sorrow.
But the big ex-dragoon had survived his affliction by a twelvemonth, and hard as it may be to
     have to tell it, he did not look much the worse for it. Heaven knows what wasted agonies of
     remorse and self-reproach may not have racked George's honest heart, as he lay awake at nights
     thinking of the wife he had abandoned in the pursuit of a fortune, which she never lived to
     share.
Once, while they were abroad, Robert Audley ventured to congratulate him upon his recovered
     spirits. He burst into a bitter laugh.
"Do you know, Bob," he said, "that when some of our fellows were wounded in India, they came
     home, bringing bullets inside them. They did not talk of them, and they were stout and hearty,
     and looked as well, perhaps, as you or I; but every change in the weather, however slight,
     every variation of the atmosphere, however trifling, brought back the old agony of their wounds
     as sharp as ever they had felt it on the battle-field. I've had my wound, Bob; I carry the
     bullet still, and I shall carry it into my coffin."
The travelers returned from St. Petersburg in the spring, and George again took up his
     quarters at his old friend's chambers, only leaving them now and then to run down to
     Southampton and take a look at his little boy. He always went loaded with toys and sweetmeats
     to give to the child; but, for all this, Georgey would not become very familiar with his papa,
     and the young man's heart sickened as he began to fancy that even his child was lost to
     him.
"What can I do?" he thought. "If I take him away from his grandfather, I shall break his
     heart; if I let him remain, he will grow up a stranger to me, and care more for that drunken
     old hypocrite than for his own father. But then, what could an ignorant, heavy dragoon like me
     do with such a child? What could I teach him, except to smoke cigars and idle around all day
     with his hands in his pockets?"
So the anniversary of that 30th of August, upon which George had seen the advertisement of
     his wife's death in the Times newspaper, came round for the first time, and the young
     man put off his black clothes and the shabby crape from his hat, and laid his mournful garments
     in a trunk in which he kept a packet of his wife's letters, her portrait, and that lock of hair
     which had been cut from her head after death. Robert Audley had never seen either the letters,
     the portrait, or the long tress of silky hair; nor, indeed, had George ever mentioned the name
     of his dead wife after that one day at Ventnor, on which he learned the full particulars of her
     decease.
"I shall write to my cousin Alicia to-day, George," the young barrister said, upon this very
     30th of August. "Do you know that the day after to-morrow is the 1st of September? I shall
     write and tell her that we will both run down to the Court for a week's shooting."
"No, no, Bob; go by yourself; they don't want me, and I'd rather—"
"Bury yourself in Figtree Court, with no company but my dogs and canaries! No, George, you
     shall do nothing of the kind."
"But I don't care for shooting."
"And do you suppose I care for it?" cried Robert, with charming naivete.
     "Why, man, I don't know a partridge from a pigeon, and it might be the 1st of April, instead of
     the 1st of September, for aught I care. I never hurt a bird in my life, but I have hurt my own
     shoulder with the weight of my gun. I only go down to Essex for the change of air, the good
     dinners, and the sight of my uncle's honest, handsome face. Besides, this time I've another
     inducement, as I want to see this fair-haired paragon—my new aunt. You'll go with me,
     George?"
"Yes, if you really wish it."
The quiet form his grief had taken after its first brief violence, left him as submissive as
     a child to the will of his friend; ready to go anywhere or do anything; never enjoying himself,
     or originating any enjoyment, but joining in the pleasures of others with a hopeless,
     uncomplaining, unobtrusive resignation peculiar to his simple nature. But the return of post
     brought a letter from Alicia Audley, to say that the two young men could not be received at the
     Court.
"There are seventeen spare bed-rooms," wrote the young lady, in an indignant running hand,
     "but for all that, my dear Robert, you can't come; for my lady has taken it into her silly head
     that she is too ill to entertain visitors (there is no more the matter with her than there is
     with me), and she cannot have gentlemen (great, rough men, she says) in the house. Please
     apologize to your friend Mr. Talboys, and tell him that papa expects to see you both in the
     hunting season."
"My lady's airs and graces shan't keep us out of Essex for all that," said Robert, as he
     twisted the letter into a pipe-light for his big meerschaum. "I'll tell you what we'll do,
     George: there's a glorious inn at Audley, and plenty of fishing in the neighborhood; we'll go
     there and have a week's sport. Fishing is much better than shooting; you've only to lie on a
     bank and stare at your line; I don't find that you often catch anything, but it's very
     pleasant."
He held the twisted letter to the feeble spark of fire glimmering in the grate, as he spoke,
     and then changing his mind, deliberately unfolded it, and smoothed the crumpled paper with his
     hand.
"Poor little Alicia!" he said, thoughtfully; "it's rather hard to treat her letter so
     cavalierly—I'll keep it;" upon which Mr. Robert Audley put the note back into its envelope, and
     afterward thrust it into a pigeon-hole in his office desk, marked important. Heaven
     knows what wonderful documents there were in this particular pigeon-hole, but I do not think it
     likely to have contained anything of great judicial value. If any one could at that moment have
     told the young barrister that so simple a thing as his cousin's brief letter would one day come
     to be a link in that terrible chain of evidence afterward to be slowly forged in the only
     criminal case in which he was ever to be concerned, perhaps Mr. Robert Audley would have lifted
     his eyebrows a little higher than usual.
So the two young men left London the next day, with one portmanteau and a rod and tackle
     between them, and reached the straggling, old-fashioned, fast-decaying village of Audley, in
     time to order a good dinner at the Sun Inn.
Audley Court was about three-quarters of a mile from the village, lying, as I have said, deep
     down in the hollow, shut in by luxuriant timber. You could only reach it by a cross-road
     bordered by trees, and as trimly kept as the avenues in a gentleman's park. It was a lonely
     place enough, even in all its rustic beauty, for so bright a creature as the late Miss Lucy
     Graham, but the generous baronet had transformed the interior of the gray old mansion into a
     little palace for his young wife, and Lady Audley seemed as happy as a child surrounded by new
     and costly toys.
In her better fortunes, as in her old days of dependence, wherever she went she seemed to
     take sunshine and gladness with her. In spite of Miss Alicia's undisguised contempt for her
     step-mother's childishness and frivolity, Lucy was better loved and more admired than the
     baronet's daughter. That very childishness had a charm which few could resist. The innocence
     and candor of an infant beamed in Lady Audley's fair face, and shone out of her large and
     liquid blue eyes. The rosy lips, the delicate nose, the profusion of fair ringlets, all
     contributed to preserve to her beauty the character of extreme youth and freshness. She owned
     to twenty years of age, but it was hard to believe her more than seventeen. Her fragile figure,
     which she loved to dress in heavy velvets, and stiff, rustling silks, till she looked like a
     child tricked out for a masquerade, was as girlish as if she had just left the nursery. All her
     amusements were childish. She hated reading, or study of any kind, and loved society. Rather
     than be alone, she would admit Phoebe Marks into her confidence, and loll on one of the sofas
     in her luxurious dressing-room, discussing a new costume for some coming dinner-party; or sit
     chattering to the girl with her jewel-box beside her, upon the satin cushions, and Sir
     Michael's presents spread out in her lap, while she counted and admired her treasures.
She had appeared at several public balls at Chelmsford and Colchester, and was immediately
     established as the belle of the county. Pleased with her high position and her handsome house;
     with every caprice gratified, every whim indulged; admired and caressed wherever she went; fond
     of her generous husband; rich in a noble allowance of pin-money; with no poor relations to
     worry her with claims upon her purse or patronage; it would have been hard to find in the
     County of Essex a more fortunate creature than Lucy, Lady Audley.
The two young men loitered over the dinner-table in the private sitting-room at the Sun Inn.
     The windows were thrown wide open, and the fresh country air blew in upon them as they dined.
     The weather was lovely; the foliage of the woods touched here and there with faint gleams of
     the earliest tints of autumn; the yellow corn still standing in some of the fields, in others
     just falling under the shining sickle; while in the narrow lanes you met great wagons drawn by
     broad-chested cart-horses, carrying home the rich golden store. To any one who has been, during
     the hot summer months, pent up in London, there is in the first taste of rustic life a kind of
     sensuous rapture scarcely to be described. George Talboys felt this, and in this he experienced
     the nearest approach to enjoyment that he had ever known since his wife's death.
The clock struck five as they finished dinner.
"Put on your hat, George," said Robert Audley; "they don't dine at the Court till seven; we
     shall have time to stroll down and see the old place and its inhabitants."
The landlord, who had come into the room with a bottle of wine, looked up as the young man
     spoke.
"I beg your pardon, Mr. Audley," he said, "but if you want to see your uncle, you'll lose
     your time by going to the Court just now. Sir Michael and my lady and Miss Alicia have all gone
     to the races up at Chorley, and they won't be back till nigh upon eight o'clock, most likely.
     They must pass by here to go home."
Under these circumstances of course it was no use going to the Court, so the two young men
     strolled through the village and looked at the old church, and then went and reconnoitered the
     streams in which they were to fish the next day, and by such means beguiled the time until
     after seven o'clock. At about a quarter past that hour they returned to the inn, and seating
     themselves in the open window, lit their cigars and looked out at the peaceful prospect.
We hear every day of murders committed in the country. Brutal and treacherous murders; slow,
     protracted agonies from poisons administered by some kindred hand; sudden and violent deaths by
     cruel blows, inflicted with a stake cut from some spreading oak, whose every shadow
     promised—peace. In the county of which I write, I have been shown a meadow in which, on a quiet
     summer Sunday evening, a young farmer murdered the girl who had loved and trusted him; and yet,
     even now, with the stain of that foul deed upon it, the aspect of the spot is—peace. No species
     of crime has ever been committed in the worst rookeries about Seven Dials that has not been
     also done in the face of that rustic calm which still, in spite of all, we look on with a
     tender, half-mournful yearning, and associate with—peace.
It was dusk when gigs and chaises, dog-carts and clumsy farmers' phaetons, began to rattle
     through the village street, and under the windows of the Sun Inn; deeper dusk still when an
     open carriage and four drew suddenly up beneath the rocking sign-post.
It was Sir Michael Audley's barouche which came to so sudden a stop before the little inn.
     The harness of one of the leaders had become out of order, and the foremost postillion
     dismounted to set it right.
"Why, it's my uncle," cried Robert Audley, as the carriage stopped. "I'll run down and speak
     to him."
George lit another cigar, and, sheltered by the window-curtains, looked out at the little
     party. Alicia sat with her back to the horses, and he could perceive, even in the dusk, that
     she was a handsome brunette; but Lady Audley was seated on the side of the carriage furthest
     from the inn, and he could see nothing of the fair-haired paragon of whom he had heard so
     much.
"Why, Robert," exclaimed Sir Michael, as his nephew emerged from the inn, "this is a
     surprise!"
"I have not come to intrude upon you at the Court, my dear uncle," said the young man, as the
     baronet shook him by the hand in his own hearty fashion. "Essex is my native county, you know,
     and about this time of year I generally have a touch of homesickness; so George and I have come
     down to the inn for two or three day's fishing."
"George—George who?"
"George Talboys."
"What, has he come?" cried Alicia. "I'm so glad; for I'm dying to see this handsome young
     widower."
"Are you, Alicia?" said her cousin, "Then egad, I'll run and fetch him, and introduce you to
     him at once."
Now, so complete was the dominion which Lady Audley had, in her own childish, unthinking way,
     obtained over her devoted husband, that it was very rarely that the baronet's eyes were long
     removed from his wife's pretty face. When Robert, therefore, was about to re-enter the inn, it
     needed but the faintest elevation of Lucy's eyebrows, with a charming expression of weariness
     and terror, to make her husband aware that she did not want to be bored by an introduction to
     Mr. George Talboys.
"Never mind to-night, Bob," he said. "My wife is a little tired after our long day's
     pleasure. Bring your friend to dinner to-morrow, and then he and Alicia can make each other's
     acquaintance. Come round and speak to Lady Audley, and then we'll drive home."
My lady was so terribly fatigued that she could only smile sweetly, and hold out a tiny
     gloved hand to her nephew by marriage.
"You will come and dine with us to-morrow, and bring your interesting friend?" she said, in a
     low and tired voice. She had been the chief attraction of the race-course, and was wearied out
     by the exertion of fascinating half the county.
"It's a wonder she didn't treat you to her never-ending laugh," whispered Alicia, as she
     leaned over the carriage-door to bid Robert good-night; "but I dare say she reserves that for
     your delectation to-morrow. I suppose you are fascinated as well as everybody else?"
     added the young lady, rather snappishly.
"She is a lovely creature, certainly," murmured Robert, with placid admiration.
"Oh, of course! Now, she is the first woman of whom I ever heard you say a civil word, Robert
     Audley. I'm sorry to find you can only admire wax dolls."
Poor Alicia had had many skirmishes with her cousin upon that particular temperament of his,
     which, while it enabled him to go through life with perfect content and tacit enjoyment,
     entirely precluded his feeling one spark of enthusiasm upon any subject whatever.
"As to his ever falling in love," thought the young lady sometimes, "the idea is
     preposterous. If all the divinities on earth were ranged before him, waiting for his sultanship
     to throw the handkerchief, he would only lift his eyebrows to the middle of his forehead, and
     tell them to scramble for it."
But, for once in his life, Robert was almost enthusiastic.
"She's the prettiest little creature you ever saw in your life, George," he cried, when the
     carriage had driven off and he returned to his friend. "Such blue eyes, such ringlets, such a
     ravishing smile, such a fairy-like bonnet—all of a-tremble with heart's-ease and dewy spangles,
     shining out of a cloud of gauze. George Talboys, I feel like the hero of a French novel: I am
     falling in love with my aunt."
The widower only sighed and puffed his cigar fiercely out of the open window. Perhaps he was
     thinking of that far-away time—little better than five years ago, in fact; but such an age gone
     by to him—when he first met the woman for whom he had worn crape round his hat three days
     before. They returned, all those old unforgotten feelings; they came back, with the scene of
     their birth-place. Again he lounged with his brother officers upon the shabby pier at the
     shabby watering-place, listening to a dreary band with a cornet that was a note and a half
     flat. Again he heard the old operatic airs, and again she came tripping toward him,
     leaning on her old father's arm, and pretending (with such a charming, delicious, serio-comic
     pretense) to be listening to the music, and quite unaware of the admiration of half a dozen
     open-mouthed cavalry officers. Again the old fancy came back that she was something too
     beautiful for earth, or earthly uses, and that to approach her was to walk in a higher
     atmosphere and to breathe a purer air. And since this she had been his wife, and the mother of
     his child. She lay in the little churchyard at Ventnor, and only a year ago he had given the
     order for her tombstone. A few slow, silent tears dropped upon his waistcoat as he thought of
     these things in the quiet and darkening room.
Lady Audley was so exhausted when she reached home, that she excused herself from the
     dinner-table, and retired at once to her dressing-room, attended by her maid, Phoebe Marks.
She was a little capricious in her conduct to this maid—sometimes very confidential,
     sometimes rather reserved; but she was a liberal mistress, and the girl had every reason to be
     satisfied with her situation.
This evening, in spite of her fatigue, she was in extremely high spirits, and gave an
     animated account of the races, and the company present at them.
"I am tired to death, though, Phoebe," she said, by-and-by. "I am afraid I must look a
     perfect fright, after a day in the hot sun."
There were lighted candles on each side of the glass before which Lady Audley was standing
     unfastening her dress. She looked full at her maid as she spoke, her blue eyes clear and
     bright, and the rosy childish lips puckered into an arch smile.
"You are a little pale, my lady," answered the girl, "but you look as pretty as ever."
"That's right, Phoebe," she said, flinging herself into a chair, and throwing back her curls
     at the maid, who stood, brush in hand, ready to arrange the luxuriant hair for the night. "Do
     you know, Phoebe, I have heard some people say that you and I are alike?"
"I have heard them say so, too, my lady," said the girl, quietly "but they must be very
     stupid to say it, for your ladyship is a beauty, and I am a poor, plain creature."
"Not at all, Phoebe," said the little lady, superbly; "you are like me, and your
     features are very nice; it is only color that you want. My hair is pale yellow shot with gold,
     and yours is drab; my eyebrows and eyelashes are dark brown, and yours are almost—I scarcely
     like to say it, but they're almost white, my dear Phoebe. Your complexion is sallow, and mine
     is pink and rosy. Why, with a bottle of hair-dye, such as we see advertised in the papers, and
     a pot of rouge, you'd be as good-looking as I, any day, Phoebe."
She prattled on in this way for a long time, talking of a hundred different subjects, and
     ridiculing the people she had met at the races, for her maid's amusement. Her step-daughter
     came into the dressing-room to bid her good-night, and found the maid and mistress laughing
     aloud over one of the day's adventures. Alicia, who was never familiar with her servants,
     withdrew in disgust at my lady's frivolity.
"Go on brushing my hair, Phoebe," Lady Audley said, every time the girl was about to complete
     her task, "I quite enjoy a chat with you."
At last, just as she had dismissed her maid, she suddenly called her back. "Phoebe Marks,"
     she said, "I want you to do me a favor."
"Yes, my lady."
"I want you to go to London by the first train to-morrow morning to execute a little
     commission for me. You may take a day's holiday afterward, as I know you have friends in town;
     and I shall give you a five-pound note if you do what I want, and keep your own counsel about
     it."
"Yes, my lady."
"See that that door is securely shut, and come and sit on this stool at my feet."
The girl obeyed. Lady Audley smoothed her maid's neutral-tinted hair with her plump, white,
     and bejeweled hand as she reflected for a few moments.
"And now listen, Phoebe. What I want you to do is very simple."
It was so simple that it was told in five minutes, and then Lady Audley retired into her
     bed-room, and curled herself up cozily under the eider-down quilt. She was a chilly creature,
     and loved to bury herself in soft wrappings of satin and fur.
"Kiss me, Phoebe," she said, as the girl arranged the curtains. "I hear Sir Michael's step in
     the anteroom; you will meet him as you go out, and you may as well tell him that you are going
     up by the first train to-morrow morning to get my dress from Madam Frederick for the dinner at
     Morton Abbey."
It was late the next morning when Lady Audley went down to breakfast—past ten o'clock. While
     she was sipping her coffee a servant brought her a sealed packet, and a book for her to
     sign.
"A telegraphic message!" she cried; for the convenient word telegram had not yet been
     invented. "What can be the matter?"
She looked up at her husband with wide-open, terrified eyes, and seemed half afraid to break
     the seal. The envelope was addressed to Miss Lucy Graham, at Mr. Dawson's, and had been sent on
     from the village.
"Read it, my darling," he said, "and do not be alarmed; it may be nothing of any
     importance."
It came from a Mrs. Vincent, the schoolmistress with whom she had lived before entering Mr.
     Dawson's family. The lady was dangerously ill, and implored her old pupil to go and see
     her.
"Poor soul! she always meant to leave me her money," said Lucy, with a mournful smile. "She
     has never heard of the change in my fortunes. Dear Sir Michael, I must go to her."
"To be sure you must, dearest. If she was kind to my poor girl in her adversity, she has a
     claim upon her prosperity that shall never be forgotten. Put on your bonnet, Lucy; we shall be
     in time to catch the express."
"You will go with me?"
"Of course, my darling. Do you suppose I would let you go alone?"
"I was sure you would go with me," she said, thoughtfully.
"Does your friend send any address?"
"No; but she always lived at Crescent Villa, West Brompton; and no doubt she lives there
     still."
There was only time for Lady Audley to hurry on her bonnet and shawl before she heard the
     carriage drive round to the door, and Sir Michael calling to her at the foot of the
     staircase.
Her suite of rooms, as I have said, opened one out of another, and terminated in an octagon
     antechamber hung with oil-paintings. Even in her haste she paused deliberately at the door of
     this room, double-locked it, and dropped the key into her pocket. This door once locked cut off
     all access to my lady's apartments.
