
CHAPTER XXIV.
GEORGE'S LETTERS.
Robert Audley did not return to Southampton, but took a ticket for the first up town train
     that left Wareham, and reached Waterloo Bridge an hour or two after dark. The snow, which had
     been hard and crisp in Dorsetshire, was a black and greasy slush in the Waterloo Road, thawed
     by the flaring lamps of the gin-palaces and the glaring gas in the butchers' shops.
Robert Audley shrugged his shoulders as he looked at the dingy streets through which the
     Hansom carried him, the cab-man choosing—with that delicious instinct which seems innate in the
     drivers of hackney vehicles—all those dark and hideous thoroughfares utterly unknown to the
     ordinary pedestrian.
"What a pleasant thing life is," thought the barrister. "What an unspeakable boon—what an
     overpowering blessing! Let any man make a calculation of his existence, subtracting the hours
     in which he has been thoroughly happy—really and entirely at his ease, without one
      arriere pensée to mar his enjoyment—without the most infinitesimal cloud to
     overshadow the brightness of his horizon. Let him do this, and surely he will laugh in utter
     bitterness of soul when he sets down the sum of his felicity, and discovers the pitiful
     smallness of the amount. He will have enjoyed himself for a week or ten days in thirty years,
     perhaps. In thirty years of dull December, and blustering March, and showery April, and dark
     November weather, there may have been seven or eight glorious August days, through which the
     sun has blazed in cloudless radiance, and the summer breezes have breathed perpetual balm. How
     fondly we recollect these solitary days of pleasure, and hope for their recurrence, and try to
     plan the circumstances that made them bright; and arrange, and predestinate, and diplomatize
     with fate for a renewal of the remembered joy. As if any joy could ever be built up out of such
     and such constituent parts! As if happiness were not essentially accidental—a bright and
     wandering bird, utterly irregular in its migrations; with us one summer's day, and forever gone
     from us on the next! Look at marriages, for instance," mused Robert, who was as meditative in
     the jolting vehicle, for whose occupation he was to pay sixpence a mile, as if he had been
     riding a mustang on the wild loneliness of the prairies. "Look at marriage! Who is to say which
     shall be the one judicious selection out of nine hundred and ninety-nine mistakes! Who shall
     decide from the first aspect of the slimy creature, which is to be the one eel out of the
     colossal bag of snakes? That girl on the curbstone yonder, waiting to cross the street when my
     chariot shall have passed, may be the one woman out of every female creature in this vast
     universe who could make me a happy man. Yet I pass her by—bespatter her with the mud from my
     wheels, in my helpless ignorance, in my blind submission to the awful hand of fatality. If that
     girl, Clara Talboys, had been five minutes later, I should have left Dorsetshire thinking her
     cold, hard, and unwomanly, and should have gone to my grave with that mistake part and parcel
     of my mind. I took her for a stately and heartless automaton; I know her now to be a noble and
     beautiful woman. What an incalculable difference this may make in my life. When I left that
     house, I went out into the winter day with the determination of abandoning all further thought
     of the secret of George's death. I see her, and she forces me onward upon the loathsome
     path—the crooked by-way of watchfulness and suspicion. How can I say to this sister of my dead
     friend, 'I believe that your brother has been murdered! I believe that I know by whom, but I
     will take no step to set my doubts at rest, or to confirm my fears'? I cannot say this. This
     woman knows half my secret; she will soon possess herself of the rest, and then—and then—"
The cab stopped in the midst of Robert Audley's meditation, and he had to pay the cabman, and
     submit to all the dreary mechanism of life, which is the same whether we are glad or
     sorry—whether we are to be married or hung, elevated to the woolsack, or disbarred by our
     brother benchers on some mysterious technical tangle of wrong-doing, which is a social enigma
     to those outside the forum domesticum of the Middle Temple.
We are apt to be angry with this cruel hardness in our life—this unflinching regularity in
     the smaller wheels and meaner mechanism of the human machine, which knows no stoppage or
     cessation, though the mainspring be forever hollow, and the hands pointing to purposeless
     figures on a shattered dial.
Who has not felt, in the first madness of sorrow, an unreasoning rage against the mute
     propriety of chairs and tables, the stiff squareness of Turkey carpets, the unbending obstinacy
     of the outward apparatus of existence? We want to root up gigantic trees in a primeval forest,
     and to tear their huge branches asunder in our convulsive grasp; and the utmost that we can do
     for the relief of our passion is to knock over an easy-chair, or smash a few shillings' worth
     of Mr. Copeland's manufacture.
Madhouses are large and only too numerous; yet surely it is strange they are not larger, when
     we think of how many helpless wretches must beat their brains against this hopeless persistency
     of the orderly outward world, as compared with the storm and tempest, the riot and confusion
     within—when we remember how many minds must tremble upon the narrow boundary between reason and
     unreason, mad to-day and sane to-morrow, mad yesterday and sane to-day.
Robert Audley had directed the cabman to drop him at the corner of Chancery Lane, and he
     ascended the brilliantly-lighted staircase leading to the dining-saloon of The London, and
     seated himself at one of the snug tables with a confused sense of emptiness and weariness,
     rather than any agreeable sensation of healthy hunger. He had come to the luxurious
     eating-house to dine, because it was absolutely necessary to eat something somewhere, and a
     great deal easier to get a very good dinner from Mr. Sawyer than a very bad one from Mrs.
     Maloney, whose mind ran in one narrow channel of chops and steaks, only variable by small
     creeks and outlets in the way of "broiled sole" or "boiled mack'-rill." The solicitous
     waiter tried in vain to rouse poor Robert to a proper sense of the solemnity of the dinner
     question. He muttered something to the effect that the man might bring him anything he liked,
     and the friendly waiter, who knew Robert as a frequent guest at the little tables, went back to
     his master with a doleful face, to say that Mr. Audley, from Figtree Court, was evidently out
     of spirits. Robert ate his dinner, and drank a pint of Moselle; but he had poor appreciation of
     the excellence of the viands or the delicate fragrance of the wine. The mental monologue still
     went on, and the young philosopher of the modern school was arguing the favorite modern
     question of the nothingness of everything, and the folly of taking too much trouble to walk
     upon a road that went nowhere, or to compass a work that meant nothing.
"I accept the dominion of that pale girl, with the statuesque features and the calm brown
     eyes," he thought. "I recognize the power of a mind superior to my own, and I yield to it, and
     bow down to it. I've been acting for myself, and thinking for myself, for the last few months,
     and I'm tired of the unnatural business. I've been false to the leading principle of my life,
     and I've suffered for the folly. I found two gray hairs in my head the week before last, and an
     impertinent crow has planted a delicate impression of his foot under my right eye. Yes, I'm
     getting old upon the right side; and why—why should it be so?"
He pushed away his plate and lifted his eyebrows, staring at the crumbs upon the glistening
     damask, as he pondered the question.
"What the devil am I doing in this galere?" he asked. "But I am in it, and I can't
     get out of it; so I better submit myself to the brown-eyed girl, and do what she tells me
     patiently and faithfully. What a wonderful solution to life's enigma there is in petticoat
     government! Man might lie in the sunshine, and eat lotuses, and fancy it 'always afternoon,' if
     his wife would let him! But she won't, bless her impulsive heart and active mind! She knows
     better than that. Who ever heard of a woman taking life as it ought to be taken? Instead of
     supporting it as an unavoidable nuisance, only redeemable by its brevity, she goes through it
     as if it were a pageant or a procession. She dresses for it, and simpers and grins, and
     gesticulates for it. She pushes her neighbors, and struggles for a good place in the dismal
     march; she elbows, and writhes, and tramples, and prances to the one end of making the most of
     the misery. She gets up early and sits up late, and is loud, and restless, and noisy, and
     unpitying. She drags her husband on to the woolsack, or pushes him into Parliament. She drives
     him full butt at the dear, lazy machinery of government, and knocks and buffets him about the
     wheels, and cranks, and screws, and pulleys; until somebody, for quiet's sake, makes him
     something that she wanted him to be made. That's why incompetent men sometimes sit in high
     places, and interpose their poor, muddled intellects between the things to be done and the
     people that can do them, making universal confusion in the helpless innocence of well-placed
     incapacity. The square men in the round holes are pushed into them by their wives. The Eastern
     potentate who declared that women were at the bottom of all mischief, should have gone a little
     further and seen why it is so. It is because women are never lazy. They don't know
     what it is to be quiet. They are Semiramides, and Cleopatras, and Joans of Arc, Queen
     Elizabeths, and Catharines the Second, and they riot in battle, and murder, and clamor and
     desperation. If they can't agitate the universe and play at ball with hemispheres, they'll make
     mountains of warfare and vexation out of domestic molehills, and social storms in household
     teacups. Forbid them to hold forth upon the freedom of nations and the wrongs of mankind, and
     they'll quarrel with Mrs. Jones about the shape of a mantle or the character of a small
     maid-servant. To call them the weaker sex is to utter a hideous mockery. They are the stronger
     sex, the noisier, the more persevering, the most self-assertive sex. They want freedom of
     opinion, variety of occupation, do they? Let them have it. Let them be lawyers, doctors,
     preachers, teachers, soldiers, legislators—anything they like—but let them be quiet—if they
     can."
Mr. Audley pushed his hands through the thick luxuriance of his straight brown hair, and
     uplifted the dark mass in his despair.
"I hate women," he thought, savagely. "They're bold, brazen, abominable creatures, invented
     for the annoyance and destruction of their superiors. Look at this business of poor George's!
     It's all woman's work from one end to the other. He marries a woman, and his father casts him
     off penniless and professionless. He hears of the woman's death and he breaks his heart—his
     good honest, manly heart, worth a million of the treacherous lumps of self-interest and
     mercenary calculation which beats in women's breasts. He goes to a woman's house and he is
     never seen alive again. And now I find myself driven into a corner by another woman, of whose
     existence I had never thought until this day. And—and then," mused Mr. Audley, rather
     irrelevantly, "there's Alicia, too; she's another nuisance. She'd like me to marry her
     I know; and she'll make me do it, I dare say, before she's done with me. But I'd much rather
     not; though she is a dear, bouncing, generous thing, bless her poor little heart."
Robert paid his bill and rewarded the waiter liberally. The young barrister was very willing
     to distribute his comfortable little income among the people who served him, for he carried his
     indifference to all things in the universe, even to the matter of pounds, shillings and pence.
     Perhaps he was rather exceptional in this, as you may frequently find that the philosopher who
     calls life an empty delusion is pretty sharp in the investment of his moneys, and recognizes
     the tangible nature of India bonds, Spanish certificates, and Egyptian scrip—as contrasted with
     the painful uncertainty of an Ego or a non-Ego in metaphysics.
The snug rooms in Figtree Court seemed dreary in their orderly quiet to Robert Audley upon
     this particular evening. He had no inclination for his French novels, though there was a packet
     of uncut romances, comic and sentimental, ordered a month before, waiting his pleasure upon one
     of the tables. He took his favorite meerschaum and dropped into his favorite chair with a
     sigh.
"It's comfortable, but it seems so deuced lonely to-night. If poor George were sitting
     opposite to me, or—or even George's sister—she's very like him—existence might be a little more
     endurable. But when a fellow's lived by himself for eight or ten years he begins to be bad
     company."
He burst out laughing presently as he finished his first pipe.
"The idea of my thinking of George's sister," he thought; "what a preposterous idiot I
     am!"
The next day's post brought him a letter in a firm but feminine hand, which was strange to
     him. He found the little packet lying on his breakfast-table, beside the warm French roll
     wrapped in a napkin by Mrs. Maloney's careful but rather dirty hands. He contemplated the
     envelope for some minutes before opening it—not in any wonder as to his correspondent, for the
     letter bore the postmark of Grange Heath, and he knew that there was only one person who was
     likely to write to him from that obscure village, but in that lazy dreaminess which was a part
     of his character.
"From Clara Talboys," he murmured slowly, as he looked critically at the clearly-shaped
     letters of his name and address. "Yes, from Clara Talboys, most decidedly; I recognized a
     feminine resemblance to poor George's hand; neater than his, and more decided than his, but
     very like, very like."
He turned the letter over and examined the seal, which bore his friend's familiar crest.
"I wonder what she says to me?" he thought. "It's a long letter, I dare say; she's the kind
     of woman who would write a long letter—a letter that will urge me on, drive me forward, wrench
     me out of myself, I've no doubt. But that can't be helped—so here goes!"
He tore open the envelope with a sigh of resignation. It contained nothing but George's two
     letters, and a few words written on the flap: "I send the letters; please preserve and return
     them—C.T."
The letter, written from Liverpool, told nothing of the writer's life except his sudden
     determination of starting for a new world, to redeem the fortunes that had been ruined in the
     old. The letter written almost immediately after George's marriage, contained a full
     description of his wife—such a description as a man could only write within three weeks of a
     love match—a description in which every feature was minutely catalogued, every grace of form or
     beauty of expression fondly dwelt upon, every charm of manner lovingly depicted.
Robert Audley read the letter three times before he laid it down.
"If George could have known for what a purpose this description would serve when he wrote
     it," thought the young barrister, "surely his hand would have fallen paralyzed by horror, and
     powerless to shape one syllable of these tender words."
