<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Return of The
 Soldier, by Rebecca West.</title><author>West, Rebecca [pseud. Cicily Isabel Fairfield] (1892-1983)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1918</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III
CHRIS told the story lingeringly, in loving detail. From Uncle Ambrose's gates,
    it seems, one took the path across the meadow where Whiston's cows are put to
    graze, passed through the second stile—the one between the two big alders—into a
    long straight road that ran across the flat lands to Bray. After a mile or so
    there branched from it a private road that followed a line of noble poplars down
    to the ferry. Between two of them—he described it meticulously, as though it
    were of immense significance—there stood a white hawthorn. In front were the
    dark-green, glassy waters of an unvisited back-water, and beyond them a bright
    lawn set with many walnut-trees and a few great chestnuts, well lighted with
    their candles, and to the left of that a low, white house with a
    green dome rising in its middle, and a veranda with a roof of hammered iron that
    had gone verdigris-color with age and the Thames weather. This was the Monkey
    Island Inn. The third Duke of Marlborough had built it for a "folly," and
    perching there with nothing but a line of walnut-trees and a fringe of lawn
    between it and the fast, full, shining Thames, it had an eighteenth-century
    grace and silliness.
Well, one sounded the bell that hung on a post, and presently Margaret in a white
    dress would come out of the porch and would walk to the stone steps down to the
    river. Invariably, as she passed the walnut-tree that overhung the path, she
    would pick a leaf, crush it, and sniff the sweet scent; and as she came near the
    steps she would shade her eyes and peer across the water. "She is a little
    near-sighted; you can't imagine how sweet it makes her look," Chris
    explained. (I did not say that I had seen her, for, indeed, this Margaret I had
    never seen.) A sudden serene gravity would show that she had seen one, and she
    would get into the four-foot punt that was used as a ferry and bring it over
    very slowly, with rather stiff movements of her long arms, to exactly the right
    place. When she had got the punt up on the gravel her serious brow would relax,
    and she would smile at one and shake hands and say something friendly, like,
    "Father thought you'd be over this afternoon, it being so fine; so he's saved
    some duck's eggs for tea."
And then one took the pole from her and brought her back to the island, though
    probably one did not mount the steps to the lawn for a long time. It was so good
    to sit in the punt by the landing-stage while Margaret dabbled her hands in the
    black waters and forgot her shyness as one talked. "She's such good company. She's got an accurate mind that would have made her a good
    engineer, but when she picks up facts she kind of gives them a motherly hug.
    She's charity and love itself." (Again I did not say that I had seen her.) If
    people drifted in to tea, one had to talk to her while she cut the bread and
    butter and the sandwiches in the kitchen, but in this year of floods few
    visitors cared to try the hard rowing below Bray Lock.

So usually one sat down there in the boat, talking with a sense of leisure, as
    though one had all the rest of one's life in which to carry on this
    conversation, and noting how the reflected ripple of the water made a bright,
    vibrant, mark upon her throat, and other effects of the scene upon her beauty,
    until the afternoon grew drowsy, and she said, "Father will be wanting his tea."
    And they would go up and find old Allington, in white ducks, standing in the
    fringe of long grasses and cow-parsley on the other edge of the
    island, looking to his poultry or his rabbits. He was a little man, with a tuft
    of copper-colored hair rising from the middle of his forehead like a clown's
    curl, who shook hands hard and explained very soon that he was a rough
    diamond.
Then they all had tea under the walnut-tree where the canary's cage was hanging,
    and the ducks' eggs would be brought out, and Mr. Allington would talk much
    Thames-side gossip: how the lock-keeper at Teddington had had his back broken by
    a swan, mad as swans are in May; how they would lose their license at the
    Dovetail Arms if they were not careful; and how the man who kept the inn by
    Surly Hall was like to die, because after he had been cursing his daughter for
    two days for having run away with a soldier from Windsor Barracks, he had
    suddenly seen her white face in a clump of rushes in the river just under the
    hole in the garden fence. Margaret would sit quiet, round-eyed at
    the world's ways, and shy because of Chris.
So they would sit on that bright lawn until the day was dyed with evening blue,
    and Mr. Allington was more and more often obliged to leap into the punt to chase
    his ducks, which had started on a trip to Bray Lock, or to crawl into the
    undergrowth after rabbits similarly demoralized by the dusk.
Then Chris would say he had to go, and they would stand in a communing silence
    while the hearty voice of Mr. Allington shouted from midstream or under the
    alder-boughs a disregarded invitation to stay and have a bite of supper. In the
    liquefaction of colors which happens on a summer evening, when the green grass
    seemed like a precious fluid poured out on the earth and dripping over to the
    river, and the chestnut candles were no longer proud flowers, but just wet,
    white lights in the humid mass of the tree, when the brown earth
    seemed just a little denser than the water, Margaret also participated.
Chris explained this part of his story stumblingly; but I, too, have watched
    people I loved in the dusk, and I know what he meant. As she sat in the punt
    while he ferried himself across it was no longer visible that her fair hair
    curled differently and that its rather wandering parting was a little on one
    side; that her straight brows, which were a little darker than her hair, were
    nearly always contracted in a frown of conscientious speculation; that her mouth
    and chin were noble, yet as delicate as flowers; that her shoulders were
    slightly hunched because her young body, like a lily-stem, found it difficult to
    manage its own tallness. She was then just a girl in white who lifted a white
    face or drooped a dull-gold head. Then she was nearer to him than at any
        other time. That he loved her in this twilight, which obscured
    all the physical details which he adored, seemed to him a guarantee that theirs
    was a changeless love which would persist if she were old or maimed or
    disfigured.
He stood beside the crazy post where the bell hung and watched the white figure
    take the punt over the black waters, mount the gray steps, and assume some of
    their grayness, become a green shade in the green darkness of the
    foliage-darkened lawn, and he exulted in that guarantee.
How long this went on he had forgotten; but it continued for some time before
    there came the end of his life, the last day he could remember. I was barred out
    of that day. His lips told me of its physical appearances, while from his wet,
    bright eyes and his flushed skin, his beautiful signs of a noble excitement, I
    tried to derive the real story. It seemed that the day when he bicycled over to
        Monkey Island, happy because Uncle Ambrose had gone up to town
    and he could stay to supper with the Allingtons, was the most glorious day the
    year had yet brought. The whole world seemed melting into light. Cumulus-clouds
    floated very high, like lumps of white light, against a deep, glowing sky, and
    dropped dazzling reflections on the beaming Thames. The trees moved not like
    timber, shocked by wind, but floatingly, like weeds at the bottom of a well of
    sunshine. When Margaret came out of the porch and paused, as she always did, to
    crush and smell the walnut-leaf and shade her eyes with her hand, her white
    dress shone like silver.

She brought the punt across and said very primly, "Dad will be disappointed; he's
    gone up to town on business," and answered gravely, "That is very kind of you,"
    when he took the punt-pole from her and said laughingly: "Never
    mind. I'll come and see you all the same." (I could see them as Chris spoke, so
    young and pale and solemn, with the intense light spilling all around them.)
    That afternoon they did not sit in the punt by the landing-stage, but wandered
    about the island and played with the rabbits and looked at the ducks and were
    inordinately silent. For a long time they stood in the fringe of rough grass on
    the other side of the island, and Margaret breathed contentedly that the Thames
    was so beautiful. Past the spit of sand at the far end of the island, where a
    great swan swanked to the empty reach that it would protect its mate against all
    comers, the river opened to a silver breadth between flat meadows stretching
    back to far rows of pin-thick black poplars, until it wound away to Windsor
    behind a line of high trees whose heads were bronze with unopened
    buds, and whose flanks were hidden by a head of copper-beech and crimson and
    white hawthorn.
Chris said he would take her down to Dorney Lock in the skiff, and she got in
    very silently and obediently; but as soon as they were out in midstream she
    developed a sense of duty, and said she could not leave the inn with just that
    boy to look after it. And then she went into the kitchen and, sucking in her
    lower lip for shyness, very conscientiously cut piles of bread and butter in
    case some visitors came to tea. Just when Chris was convincing her of the
    impossibility of any visitors arriving they came, a fat woman in a luscious pink
    blouse and an old chap who had been rowing in a tweed waistcoat. Chris went out,
    though Margaret laughed and trembled and begged him not to, and waited on them.
    It should have been a great lark, but suddenly he hated them, and when they
    offered him a tip for pushing the boat off, he snarled absurdly and
    ran back, miraculously relieved, to the bar-parlor.
Still Margaret would not leave the island. "Supposing," she said, "that Mr.
    Learoyd comes for his ale." But she consented to walk with him to the wild part
    of the island, where poplars and alders and willows grew round a clearing in
    which white willow-herb and purple figwort and here and there a potato-flower,
    last ailing consequence of one of Mr. Allington's least successful enterprises,
    fought down to the fringe of iris on the river's lip. In this gentle jungle was
    a rustic seat, relic of a reckless aspiration on the part of Mr. Allington to
    make this a pleasure-garden, and on it they sat until a pale moon appeared above
    the green corn-field on the other side of the river. "Not six yet," he said,
    taking out his watch. "Not six yet," she repeated. Words seemed to bear more
        significance than they had ever borne before. Then a heron
    flapped gigantic in front of the moon, and swung in wide circles round the
    willow-tree before them. "Oh, look!" she cried. He seized the hand she flung
    upward and gathered her into his arms. They were so for long, while the great
    bird's wings beat about them.
Afterward she pulled at his hand. She wanted to go back across the lawn and walk
    round the inn, which looked mournful, as unlit houses do by dusk. They passed
    beside the green-and-white stucco barrier of the veranda and stood on the
    three-cornered lawn that shelved high over the stream at the island's end,
    regarding the river, which was now something more wonderful than water, because
    it had taken to its bosom the rose and amber glories of the sunset smoldering
    behind the elms and Bray church-tower. Birds sat on the telegraph wires that
    spanned the river as the black notes sit on a staff of music. Then
    she went to the window of the parlor and rested her cheek against the glass,
    looking in. The little room was sad with twilight, and there was nothing to be
    seen but Margaret's sewing-machine on the table and the enlarged photograph of
    Margaret's mother over the mantel-piece, and the views of Tintern Abbey framed
    in red plush, and on the floor, the marigold pattern making itself felt through
    the dusk, Mr. Allington's carpet slippers. "Think of me sitting in there," she
    whispered, "not knowing you loved me." Then they went into the bar and drank
    milk, while she walked about fingering familiar things with an absurd expression
    of exaltation, as though that day she was fond of everything, even the handles
    of the beer-engine.
When there had descended on them a night as brilliant as the day he drew her out
    into the darkness, which was sweet with the scent of walnut-leaves, and they went across the lawn, bending beneath the chestnut-boughs, not to
    the wild part of the island, but to a circle of smooth turf divided from it by a
    railing of wrought iron. On this stood a small Greek temple, looking very lovely
    in the moonlight. He had never brought Margaret here before, because Mr.
    Allington had once told him, spatulate forefinger at his nose, that it had been
    built for the "dook" for his excesses, and it was in the quality of his love for
    her that he could not bear to think of her in association with anything base.
    But to-night there was nothing anywhere but beauty. He lifted her in his arms
    and carried her within the columns, and made her stand in a niche above the
    altar. A strong stream of moonlight rushed upon her there; by its light he could
    not tell if her hair was white as silver or yellow as gold, and again he was
    filled with exaltation because he knew that it would not have
    mattered if it had been white. His love was changeless. Lifting her down from
    the niche, he told her so.
And as he spoke, her warm body melted to nothingness in his arms. The columns
    that had stood so hard and black against the quivering tide of moonlight and
    starlight seemed to totter and dissolve. He was lying in a hateful world where
    barbed-wire entanglements showed impish knots against a livid sky full of
    blooming noise and splashes of fire and wails for water, and his back was
    hurting intolerably.
Chris fell to blowing out the candles, and I, perhaps because the egotistical
    part of me was looking for something to say that would make him feel me devoted
    and intimate, could not speak.
Suddenly he desisted, stared at a candle-flame, and said:
"If you had seen the way she rested her cheek against the glass and looked into
        the little room you'd understand that I can't say, 'Yes,
    Kitty's my wife, and Margaret somehow just nothing at all.'"
"Of course you can't," I murmured sympathetically.
We gripped hands, and he brought down on our conversation the finality of
        darkness.
</div></body></text></TEI>