<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Return of The
 Soldier, by Rebecca West.</title><author>West, Rebecca [pseud. Cicily Isabel Fairfield] (1892-1983)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1918</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
CHAPTER V
AFTER the automobile had taken Margaret away Chris came to us as we sat in the
    drawing-room, and, after standing for a while in the glow of the fire,
    hesitantly said:
"I want to tell you that I know it is all right. Margaret has explained to
    me."
Kitty crumpled her sewing into a white ball.
"You mean, I suppose, that you know I'm your wife. I'm pleased that you describe
    that as knowing 'it's all right,' and grateful that you have accepted it at
    last—on Margaret's authority. This is an occasion that would make any wife
    proud."
Her irony was as faintly acrid as a caraway-seed, and never
    afterward did she reach even that low pitch of violence; for from that mild,
    forward droop of the head with which he received the mental lunge she realized
    suddenly that this was no pretense and that something as impassable as death lay
    between them. Thereafter his proceedings evoked no comment but suffering. There
    was nothing to say when all day, save for those hours of the afternoon that
    Margaret spent with him, he sat like a blind man waiting for his darkness to
    lift. There was nothing to say when he did not seem to see our flowers, yet kept
    till they rotted the daffodils which Margaret brought from the garden that
    looked like an allotment.
So Kitty lay about like a broken doll, face downward on a sofa, with one limp arm
    dangling to the floor, or protruding stiff feet in fantastic slippers from the
    end of her curtained bed; and I tried to make my permanent wear that mood which had mitigated the end of my journey with Margaret—a mood of
    intense perception in which my strained mind settled on every vivid object that
    came under my eyes and tried to identify myself with its brightness and its lack
    of human passion. This does not mean that I passed my day in a state of joyous
    appreciation; it means that many times in the lanes of Harrowweald I have stood
    for long looking up at a fine tracery of bare boughs against the hard, high
    spring sky while the cold wind rushed through my skirts and chilled me to the
    bone, because I was afraid that when I moved my body and my attention I might
    begin to think. Indeed, grief is not the clear melancholy the young believe it.
    It is like a siege in a tropical city. The skin dries and the throat parches as
    though one were living in the heat of the desert; water and wine taste warm in
    the mouth, and food is of the substance of the sand; one snarls at
    one's company; thoughts prick one through sleep like mosquitos.
A week after my journey to Wealdstone I went to Kitty to ask her to come for a
    walk with me and found her stretched on her pillows, holding a review of her
    underclothing. She refused bitterly and added:
"Be back early. Remember Dr. Gilbert Anderson is coming at half-past four. He's
    our last hope. And tell that woman she must see him. He says he wants to see
    everybody concerned." She continued to look wanly at the frail, luminous silks
    her maid brought her as a speculator who had cornered an article for which there
    had been no demand might look at his damnably numerous, damnably unprofitable
    freights. So I went out alone into a soft day, with the dispelled winter lurking
    above in high dark clouds, under which there ran quick, fresh currents of air
    and broken shafts of insistent sunshine that spread a gray clarity
    of light in which every color showed sharp and strong. On the breast that
    Harrowweald turns to the south they had set a lambing-yard. The pale-lavender
    hurdles and gold-strewn straw were new gay notes on the opaque winter green of
    the slope, and the apprehensive bleatings of the ewes wound about the hill like
    a river of sound as they were driven up a lane hidden by the hedge. The lines of
    bare elms darkening the plains below made it seem as though the tide of winter
    had fallen and left this bare and sparkling in the spring. I liked it so much
    that I opened the gate and went and sat down on a tree which had been torn up by
    the roots in the great gale last year, but had not yet resigned itself to death,
    and was bravely decking its boughs with purple elm-flowers.
That pleased me, too, and I wished I had some one with me to enjoy this artless
    little show of the new year. I had not really wanted Kitty; the
    companions I needed were Chris and Margaret. Chris would have talked, as he
    loved to do when he looked at leisure on a broad valley, about ideas which he
    had to exclude from his ordinary hours lest they should break the power of
    business over his mind, and Margaret would have gravely watched the argument
    from the shadow of her broad hat to see that it kept true, like a housewife
    watching a saucepan of milk lest it should boil over. They were naturally my
    friends, these gentle, speculative people.
Then suddenly I was stunned with jealousy. It was not their love for each other
    that caused me such agony at that moment; it was the thought of the things their
    eyes had rested upon together. I imagined that white hawthorn among the poplars
    by the ferry on which they had looked fifteen years ago at Monkey Island, and it
    was more than I could bear. I thought how even now they might be
    exclaiming at the green smoke of the first buds on the brown undergrowth by the
    pond, and at that I slid off the tree-trunk and began walking very quickly down
    the hill. The red cows drank from the pond cupped by the willow-roots; a
    raw-boned stallion danced clumsily because warmth was running through the
    ground. I found a stream in the fields and followed it till it became a shining
    dike embanked with glowing green and gold mosses in the midst of woods; and the
    sight of those things was no sort of joy, because my vision was solitary. I
    wanted to end my desperation by leaping from a height, and I climbed on a knoll
    and flung myself face downward on the dead leaves below.
I was now utterly cut off from Chris. Before, when I looked at him, I knew an
    instant ease in the sight of the short golden down on his cheeks, the ridge of
    bronze flesh above his thick, fair eyebrows. But now I was too busy
    reassuring him by showing a steady, undistorted profile crowned by a neat, proud
    sweep of hair instead of the tear-darkened mask he always feared ever to have
    enough vitality left over to enjoy his presence. I spoke in a calm voice full
    from the chest, quite unfluted with agony; I read "Country Life" with ponderous
    interest; I kept my hands, which I desired to wring, in doeskin gloves for most
    of the day; I played with the dogs a great deal and wore my thickest tweeds; I
    pretended that the slight heaviness of my features is a correct indication of my
    temperament. The only occasion when I could safely let the sense of him saturate
    me as it used was when I met Margaret in the hall as she came or went. She was
    very different now; she had a little smile in her eyes, as though she were
    listening to a familiar air played far away. Her awkwardness seemed indecision
    as to whether she should walk or dance to that distant music; her
    shabbiness was no more repulsive than the untidiness of a child who had been so
    eager to get to the party that it has not let its nurse finish fastening its
    frock. Always she extended a hand in an unbuttoned black thread glove and said,
    "It's another fine day again," or diffidently, as Kitty continued to withhold
    her presence, "I hope Mrs. Baldry is keeping well." Then, as our hands touched,
    he was with us, invoked by our common adoration. I felt his rough male texture
    and saw the clear warmth of his brown and gold coloring; I thought of him with
    the passion of exile. To Margaret it was a call, and she moved past me to the
    garden, holding her hands in front of her as though she bore invisible gifts,
    and pausing on the step of the French window to smile to herself, as if in her
    heart she turned over the precious thought: "He is here. This garden holds him."
    My moment, my small sole subsistence, ended in a feeling of
    jealousy as ugly and unmental as sickness. This was the saddest spring.
Nothing could mitigate the harshness of our dejection. You may think we were
    attaching an altogether fictitious importance to what was merely the delusion of
    a madman. But every minute of the day, particularly at those trying times when
    he strolled about the house and grounds with the doctors, smiling courteously,
    but without joy, and answering their questions with the crisp politeness of a
    man shaking off an inquisitive commercial traveler in a hotel smoking-room, it
    became plain that if madness means a liability to wild error about the world
    Chris was not mad. It was our peculiar shame that he had rejected us when he had
    attained to something saner than sanity. His very loss of memory was a triumph
    over the limitations of language which prevent the mass of men from making
    explicit statements about their spiritual relationships. If he had
    said to Kitty and me, "I do not know you," we would have gaped; if he had
    expanded his meaning and said, "You are nothing to me; my heart is separate from
    your hearts," we would have wept at an unkindness he had not intended. But by
    the blankness of those eyes which saw me only as a disregarded playmate and
    Kitty not at all save as a stranger who had somehow become a decorative presence
    in his home and the orderer of his meals he let us know completely where we
    were. Even though I lay weeping at it on the dead leaves I was sensible of the
    bitter rapture which attends the discovery of any truth. I felt, indeed, a cold
    intellectual pride in his refusal to remember his prosperous maturity and his
    determined dwelling in the time of his first love, for it showed him so much
    saner than the rest of us, who take life as it comes, loaded with the
    unessential and the irritating. I was even willing to admit that
    this choice of what was to him reality out of all the appearances so copiously
    presented by the world, this adroit recovery of the dropped pearl of beauty, was
    the act of genius I had always expected from him. But that did not make less
    agonizing this exclusion from his life.
I could not think clearly about it. I suppose that the subject of our tragedy,
    written in spiritual terms, was that in Kitty he had turned from the type of
    woman that makes the body conqueror of the soul and in me the type that mediates
    between the soul and the body and makes them run even and unhasty like a
    well-matched pair of carriage horses, and had given himself to a woman whose
    bleak habit it was to champion the soul against the body. But I saw it just as a
    fantastic act of cruelty that I could think of only as a conjunction of
    calamitous images. I think of it happening somewhere behind the
    front, at the end of a straight road that runs by a line of ragged poplars
    between mud flats made steel-bright with floods pitted by the soft, slow rain.
    There, past a church that lacks its tower, stand a score of houses, each hideous
    with patches of bare bricks that show like sores through the ripped-off plaster
    and uncovered rafters that stick out like broken bones. There are people still
    living here. A slouchy woman sits at the door of a filthy cottage, counting some
    dirty linen and waving her bare arm at some passing soldiers. And at another
    house there is a general store with strings of orange onions and bunches of
    herbs hanging from the roof, a brown gloom rich with garlic and humming with the
    flies that live all the year round in French village shops, a black cat rubbing
    her sleepiness against the lintel. It is in there that Chris is standing, facing
    across the counter an old man in a blouse, with a scar running white into the
    gray thickets of his beard, an old man with a smile at once lewd
    and benevolent, repulsive with dirt and yet magnificent by reason of the
    Olympian structure of his body. I think he is the soul of the universe, equally
    cognizant and disregardful of every living thing, to whom I am not more dear
    than the bare-armed slouchy woman at the neighboring door. And Chris is leaning
    on the counter, his eyes glazed. (This is his spirit; his body lies out there in
    the drizzle, at the other end of the road.) He is looking down on the two
    crystal balls that the old man's foul, strong hands have rolled across to him.
    In one he sees Margaret, not in her raincoat and her nodding plumes, but as she
    is transfigured in the light of eternity. Long he looks there; then drops a
    glance to the other, just long enough to see that in its depths Kitty and I walk
    in bright dresses through our glowing gardens. We had suffered no
    transfiguration, for we are as we are, and there is nothing more to
    us. The whole truth about us lies in our material seeming. He sighs a deep sigh
    of delight and puts out his hand to the ball where Margaret shines. His sleeve
    catches the other one and sends it down to crash in a thousand pieces on the
    floor. The old man's smile continues to be lewd and benevolent; he is still not
    more interested in me than in the bare-armed woman. Chris is wholly inclosed in
    his intentness on his chosen crystal. No one weeps for this shattering of our
    world.
I stirred on the dead leaves as though I had really heard the breaking of the
    globe and cried out, "Gilbert Anderson, Gilbert Anderson must cure him." Heaven
    knows that I had no reason for faith in any doctor, for during the last week so
    many of them, as sleek as seals with their neatly brushed hair and their
    frock-coats, had stood round Chris and looked at him with the consequenceless
    deliberation of a plumber. Their most successful enterprise had
    been his futile hypnotism. He had submitted to it as a good-natured man submits
    to being blindfolded at a children's party, and under its influence had
    recovered his memory and his middle-aged personality, had talked of Kitty with
    the humorous tenderness of the English husband, and had looked possessively
    about him. But as his mind came out of the control he exposed their lie that
    they were dealing with a mere breakdown of the normal process by pushing away
    this knowledge and turning to them the blank wall, all the blanker because it
    was unconscious, of his resolution not to know. I had accepted that it would
    always be so. But at that moment I had so great a need to throw off my mood of
    despair, so insupportably loaded with all the fantastic images to which my
    fevered mind transmuted the facts of our tragedy, that I filled myself with a
    gasping, urgent faith in this new doctor. I jumped up and pushed
    through the brambles to the hedge that divided the preserves in which I was
    trespassing from our own woods, breathless because I had let it go past four and
    I had still to find Chris and Margaret for the doctor's visit at the
    half-hour.
There had been a hardening of the light while I slept that made the dear,
    familiar woods rich and sinister, and to the eye, tropical. The jewel-bright
    buds on the soot-black boughs, the blue valley distances, smudged here and there
    with the pink enamel of villa-roofs, and seen between the black-and-white
    intricacies of the birch-trunks and the luminous gray pillars of the beeches,
    hurt my wet eyes as might beauty blazing under an equatorial sun. There was a
    tropical sense of danger, too, for I walked as apprehensively as though a snake
    coiled under every leaf, because I feared to come on them when he was speaking
    to her without looking at her or thinking in silence while he
    played with her hand. Embraces do not matter; they merely indicate the will to
    love, and may as well be followed by defeat as victory. But disregard means that
    now there needs to be no straining of the eyes, no stretching forth of the
    hands, no pressing of the lips, because theirs is such a union that they are no
    longer aware of the division of their flesh. I know it must be so; a lonely life
    gives one opportunities of thinking these things out. I could not have borne to
    see signs of how he had achieved this intimacy with the woman whom a sudden
    widening of the downward vista showed as she leaned her bent back, ridged by her
    cheap stays, against a birch that some special skill of our forester had made
    wonderful for its straight slenderness. Against the clear colors of the bright
    bare wood her yellow raincoat made a muddy patch, and as a dead bough dropped
    near her she made a squalid dodging movement like a hen. She was
    not so much a person as an implication of dreary poverty, like an open door in a
    mean house that lets out the smell of cooking cabbage and the screams of
    children. Doubtlessly he sat somewhere close to her, lumpishly content. I
    thought distractedly how necessary it was that Gilbert Anderson should cure him,
    and tried to shout to her, but found my throat full of sobs. So I broke my way
    down through the fern and bramble and stood level with them, though still
    divided by some yards of broken ground.
It was not utter dullness not to have anticipated the beauty that I saw. No one
    could have told. They had taken the mackintosh rug out of the dinghy and spread
    it on this little space of clear grass, I think so that they could look at a
    scattering of early primroses in a pool of white anemones at an oak-tree's foot.
    She had run her hands over the rug so that it lay quite smooth and comfortable
    under him when at last he felt drowsy and turned on his side to
    sleep. He lay there in the confiding relaxation of a sleeping child, his hands
    unclenched, and his head thrown back so that the bare throat showed
    defenselessly. Now he was asleep and his face undarkened by thought, one saw how
    very fair he really was. And she, her mournfully vigilant face pinkened by the
    cold river of air sent by the advancing evening through the screen of
    rusted-gold bracken behind her, was sitting by him, just watching.
I have often seen people grouped like that on the common outside our gates on
    Bank holidays. Most often the man has a handkerchief over his face to shade him
    from the sun, and the woman squats beside him and peers through the undergrowth
    to see that the children come to no harm as they play. It has sometimes seemed
    to me that there was a significance about it. You know when one goes into the damp, odorous coolness of a church in a Catholic country and
    sees the kneeling worshipers, their bodies bent stiffly and reluctantly, and yet
    with abandonment as though to represent the inevitable bending of the will to a
    purpose outside the individual person, or when under any sky one sees a mother
    with her child in her arms, something turns in one's heart like a sword, and one
    says to oneself, "If humanity forgets these attitudes there is an end to the
    world." But people like me, who are not artists, are never sure about people
    they don't know. So it was not until now, when it happened to my friends, when
    it was my dear Chris and my dear Margaret who sat thus englobed in peace as in a
    crystal sphere, that I knew it was the most significant, as it was the
    loveliest, attitude in the world. It means that the woman has gathered the soul
    of the man into her soul and is keeping it warm in love and peace so that his body can rest quiet for a little time. That is a great thing for a
    woman to do. I know there are things at least as great for those women whose
    independent spirits can ride fearlessly and with interest outside the home park
    of their personal relationships, but independence is not the occupation of most
    of us. What we desire is greatness such as this, which had given sleep to the
    beloved. I had known that he was having bad nights at Baldry Court in that new
    room with the jade-green painted walls and the lapis-lazuli fireplace, which he
    found with surprise to be his instead of the remembered little room with the
    fishing-rods; but I had not been able to do anything about it.
It was not fair that by the exercise of a generosity which seemed as fortuitous a
    possession as a beautiful voice a woman should be able to do such wonderful
    things for a man. For sleep was the least of her gifts to him. What she had done
    in leading him into the quiet magic circle out of our life, out of
    the splendid house which was not so much a house as a vast piece of space
    partitioned off from the universe and decorated partly for beauty and partly to
    make our privacy more insolent, out of the garden where the flowers took thought
    as to how they should grow and the wood made as formal as a pillared aisle by
    forestry, may be judged from my anguish in being left there alone. Indeed she
    had been generous to us all, for at her touch our lives had at last fallen into
    a pattern; she was the sober thread the interweaving of which with our scattered
    magnificences had somewhat achieved the design that otherwise would not appear.
    Perhaps even her dinginess was part of her generosity, for in order to fit into
    the pattern one has sometimes to forego something of one's individual beauty.
    That is why women like us do not wear such obviously lovely dresses as cocottes,
    but clothe ourselves in garments that by their slight neglect of
    the possibilities of beauty declare that there are such things as thrift and
    restraint and care for the future. And so I could believe of Margaret that her
    determined dwelling in places where there was not enough of anything, her
    continued exposure of herself to the grime of squalid living, was unconsciously
    deliberate. The deep internal thing that had guided Chris to forgetfulness had
    guided her to poverty, so that when the time came for her meeting with her lover
    there should be not one intimation of the beauty of suave flesh to distract him
    from the message of her soul. I looked upward at this supreme act of sacrifice
    and glowed at her private gift to me. My sleep, though short, was now dreamless.
    No more did I see his body rotting into union with that brown texture of
    corruption which is No-Man's-Land; no more did I see him slipping softly down
    the parapet into the trench; no more did I hear voices talking in a
    void: "Help me, old man; I've got no legs—" "I can't, old man; I've got no
    hands." They could not take him back to the army as he was. Only that morning as
    I went through the library he had raised an appalled face from the pages of a
    history of the war.
"Jenny, it can't be true that they did that to Belgium? Those funny, quiet,
    stingy people!" And his soldierly knowledge was as deeply buried as this memory
    of that awful August. While her spell endured they could not send him back into
    the hell of war. This wonderful, kind woman held his body as safely as she held
    his soul.
I was so grateful that I was forced to go and sit down on the rug beside her. It
    was an intrusion, but I wanted to be near her. She did not look surprised when
    she turned to me her puckered brows, but smiled through the ugly fringe of
        vagrant hairs the weather had plucked from under the hard rim
    of her hat. It was part of her loveliness that even if she did not understand an
    act she could accept it.
Presently she leaned over to me across his body and whispered:
"He's not cold. I put the overcoat on him as soon as he was fairly off. I've just
    felt his hands, and they're as warm as toast." If I had whispered like that I
    would have wakened him.
Soon he stirred, groped for her hand, and lay with his cheek against the rough
    palm. He was awake, but liked to lie so.
In a little she shook her hand away and said:
"Get up and run along to the house and have some hot tea. You'll catch your death
    lying out here."
He caught her hand again. It was evident that for some reason the moment was
    charged with ecstasy for them both.
It seemed as though there was a softer air in this small clearing
    than anywhere else in the world. I stood up, with my back against a birch and
    said negligently, knowing now that nothing could really threaten them:
"There is a doctor coming at half-past four who wants to see you both."
It cast no shadow on their serenity. He smiled upward, still lying on his back,
    and hailed me, "Hallo, Jenny." But she made him get up and help her to fold the
    rug.
"It's not right to keep a doctor waiting in these times," she declared, "so
    overworked they are, poor men, since the war." As I led the way up through the
    woods to the house I heard her prove her point by an illustrative anecdote about
    something that had happened down her road. I heard, too, their footsteps come to
    a halt for a space. I think her gray eyes had looked at him so sweetly that he
    had been constrained to take her in his arms.
</div></body></text></TEI>