
CHAPTER VIII: WHITHER?
Some three months slipped away—right dreary months for Lancelot, for the Lavingtons went to
     Baden-Baden for the summer.  ‘The waters were necessary for their health.’ ...  How wonderful
     it is, by the bye, that those German Brunnen are never necessary for poor people’s health! ...
     and they did not return till the end of August.  So Lancelot buried himself up to the eyes in
     the Condition-of-the-Poor question—that is, in blue books, red books, sanitary reports, mine
     reports, factory reports; and came to the conclusion, which is now pretty generally
     entertained, that something was the matter—but what, no man knew, or, if they knew, thought
     proper to declare.  Hopeless and bewildered, he left the books, and wandered day after day from
     farm to hamlet, and from field to tramper’s tent, in hopes of finding out the secret for
     himself.  What he saw, of course I must not say; for if I did the reviewers would declare, as
     usual, one and all, that I copied out of the Morning Chronicle; and the fact that
     these pages, ninety-nine hundredths of them at least, were written two years before the
      Morning Chronicle began its invaluable investigations, would be contemptuously put
     aside as at once impossible and arrogant.  I shall therefore only say, that he saw what every
     one else has seen, at least heard of, and got tired of hearing—though alas! they have not got
     tired of seeing it; and so proceed with my story, only mentioning therein certain particulars
     which folks seem, to me, somewhat strangely, to have generally overlooked.
But whatever Lancelot saw, or thought he saw, I cannot say that it brought him any nearer to
     a solution of the question; and he at last ended by a sulky acquiescence in Sam Weller’s
     memorable dictum: ‘Who it is I can’t say; but all I can say is that somebody ought to
     be wopped for this!’
But one day, turning over, as hopelessly as he was beginning to turn over everything else, a
     new work of Mr. Carlyle’s, he fell on some such words as these:—
‘The beginning and the end of what is the matter with us in these days is—that we have
      forgotten God.’
Forgotten God?  That was at least a defect of which blue books had taken no note.  And it was
     one which, on the whole—granting, for the sake of argument, any real, living, or practical
     existence to That Being, might be a radical one—it brought him many hours of thought, that
     saying; and when they were over, he rose up and went to find—Tregarva.
‘Yes, he is the man.  He is the only man with whom I have ever met, of whom I could be sure,
     that independent of his own interest, without the allurements of respectability and decency, of
     habit and custom, he believes in God.  And he too is a poor man; he has known the struggles,
     temptations, sorrows of the poor.  I will go to him.’
But as Lancelot rose to find him, there was put into his hand a letter, which kept him at
     home a while longer—none other, in fact, than the long-expected answer from Luke.
‘WELL, MY DEAR COUSIN—You may possibly have some logical ground from which to deny Popery, if
     you deny all other religions with it; but how those who hold any received form of Christianity
     whatsoever can fairly side with you against Rome, I cannot see.  I am sure I have been sent to
     Rome by them, not drawn thither by Jesuits.  Not merely by their defects and inconsistencies;
     not merely because they go on taunting us, and shrieking at us with the cry that we ought to go
     to Rome, till we at last, wearied out, take them at their word, and do at their bidding the
     thing we used to shrink from with terror—not this merely but the very doctrines we hold in
     common with them, have sent me to Rome.  For would these men have known of them if Rome had not
     been?  The Trinity—the Atonement—the Inspiration of Scripture.—A future state—that point on
     which the present generation, without a smattering of psychological science, without even the
     old belief in apparitions, dogmatises so narrowly and arrogantly—what would they have known of
     them but for Rome?  And she says there are three realms in the future state ... heaven, hell,
     and purgatory ...  What right have they to throw away the latter, and arbitrarily retain the
     two former?  I am told that Scripture gives no warrant for a third state.  She says that it
     does—that it teaches that implicitly, as it teaches other, the very highest doctrines; some
     hold, the Trinity itself...  It may be proved from Scripture; for it may be proved from the
     love and justice of God revealed in Scripture.  The Protestants divide—in theory, that
     is—mankind into two classes, the righteous, who are destined to infinite bliss; the wicked, who
     are doomed to infinite torment; in which latter class, to make their arbitrary division
     exhaustive, they put of course nine hundred and ninety-nine out of the thousand, and doom to
     everlasting companionship with Borgias and Cagliostros, the gentle, frivolous girl, or the
     peevish boy, who would have shrunk, in life, with horror from the contact...  Well, at least,
     their hell is hellish enough ... if it were but just...  But I, Lancelot, I cannot believe it! 
     I will not believe it!  I had a brother once—affectionate, simple, generous, full of noble
     aspirations—but without, alas! a thought of God; yielding in a hundred little points, and some
     great ones, to the infernal temptations of a public school...  He died at seventeen.  Where is
     he now?  Lancelot! where is he now?  Never for a day has that thought left my mind for years. 
     Not in heaven—for he has no right there; Protestants would say that as well as I... Where,
     then?—Lancelot! not in that other place.  I cannot, I will not believe it.  For the sake of
     God’s honour, as well as of my own sanity, I will not believe it!  There must be some third
     place—some intermediate chance, some door of hope—some purifying and redeeming process beyond
     the grave...  Why not a purifying fire?  Ages of that are surely punishment enough—and if there
     be a fire of hell, why not a fire of purgatory? ...  After all, the idea of purgatory as a fire
     is only an opinion, not a dogma of the Church...  But if the gross flesh which has sinned is to
     be punished by the matter which it has abused, why may it not be purified by it?’
‘You may laugh, if you will, at both, and say again, as I have heard you say ere now, that
     the popular Christian paradise and hell are but a Pagan Olympus and Tartarus, as grossly
     material as Mahomet’s, without the honest thorough-going sexuality, which you thought made his
     notion logical and consistent...  Well, you may say that, but Protestants cannot; for their
     idea of heaven and ours is the same—with this exception, that theirs will contain but a thin
     band of saved ones, while ours will fill and grow to all eternity... I tell you, Lancelot, it
     is just the very doctrines for which England most curses Rome, and this very purgatory at the
     head of them, which constitute her strength and her allurement; which appeal to the reason, the
     conscience, the heart of men, like me, who have revolted from the novel superstition which
     looks pitilessly on at the fond memories of the brother, the prayers of the orphan, the doubled
     desolation of the widow, with its cold terrible assurance, “There is no hope for thy loved and
     lost ones—no hope, but hell for evermore!”
‘I do not expect to convert you.  You have your metempsychosis, and your theories of
     progressive incarnation, and your monads, and your spirits of the stars and flowers.  I have
     not forgotten a certain talk of ours over Falk Von Müller’s Recollections of Goethe,
     and how you materialists are often the most fantastic of theorists...  I do not expect, I say,
     to convert you.  I only want to show you there is no use trying to show the self-satisfied
     Pharisees of the popular sect—why, in spite of all their curses, men still go back to
     Rome.’
Lancelot read this, and re-read it; and smiled, but sadly—and the more he read, the stronger
     its arguments seemed to him, and he rejoiced thereat.  For there is a bad pleasure—happy he who
     has not felt it—in a pitiless reductio ad absurdum, which asks tauntingly, ‘Why do you not
     follow out your own conclusions?’—instead of thanking God that people do not follow them out,
     and that their hearts are sounder than their heads.  Was it with this feeling that the fancy
     took possession of him, to show the letter to Tregarva?  I hope not—perhaps he did not
     altogether wish to lead him into temptation, any more than I wish to lead my readers, but only
     to make him, just as I wish to make them, face manfully a real awful question now racking the
     hearts of hundreds, and see how they will be able to answer the sophist fiend—for honestly,
     such he is—when their time comes, as come it will.  At least he wanted to test at once
     Tregarva’s knowledge and his logic.  As for his ‘faith,’ alas! he had not so much reverence for
     it as to care what effect Luke’s arguments might have there.  ‘The whole man,’ quoth Lancelot
     to himself, ‘is a novel phenomenon; and all phenomena, however magnificent, are surely fair
     subjects for experiment.  Magendie may have gone too far, certainly, in dissecting a live
     dog—but what harm in my pulling the mane of a dead lion?’
So he showed the letter to Tregarva as they were fishing together one day—for Lancelot had
     been installed duly in the Whitford trout preserves’—Tregarva read it slowly; asked, shrewdly
     enough, the meaning of a word or two as he went on; at last folded it up deliberately, and
     returned it to its owner with a deep sigh.  Lancelot said nothing for a few minutes; but the
     giant seemed so little inclined to open the conversation, that he was forced at last to ask him
     what he thought of it.
‘It isn’t a matter for thinking, sir, to my mind—There’s a nice fish on the feed there, just
     over-right that alder.’
‘Hang the fish!  Why not a matter for thinking?’
‘To my mind, sir, a man may think a deal too much about many matters that come in his
     way.’
‘What should he do with them, then?’
‘Mind his own business.’
‘Pleasant for those whom they concern!—That’s rather a cold-blooded speech for you,
     Tregarva!’
The Cornishman looked up at him earnestly.  His eyes were glittering—was it with tears?
‘Don’t fancy I don’t feel for the poor young gentleman—God help him!—I’ve been through it
     all—or not through it, that’s to say.  I had a brother once, as fine a young fellow as ever
     handled pick, as kind-hearted as a woman, and as honest as the sun in Heaven.—But he would
     drink, sir;—that one temptation, he never could stand it.  And one day at the shaft’s mouth,
     reaching after the kibble-chain—maybe he was in liquor, maybe not—the Lord knows; but—’
‘I didn’t know him again, sir, when we picked him up, any more than—’ and the strong man
     shuddered from head to foot, and beat impatiently on the ground with his heavy heel, as if to
     crush down the rising horror.
‘Where is he, sir?’
A long pause.
‘Do you think I didn’t ask that, sir, for years and years after, of God, and my own soul, and
     heaven and earth, and the things under the earth, too?  For many a night did I go down that
     mine out of my turn, and sat for hours in that level, watching and watching, if perhaps the
     spirit of him might haunt about, and tell his poor brother one word of news—one way or the
     other—anything would have been a comfort—but the doubt I couldn’t bear.  And yet at last I
     learnt to bear it—and what’s more, I learnt not to care for it.  It’s a bold word—there’s one
     who knows whether or not it is a true one.’
‘Good Heavens!—and what then did you say to yourself?’
‘I said this, sir—or rather, one came as I was on my knees, and said it to me—What’s done you
     can’t mend.  What’s left, you can.  Whatever has happened is God’s concern now, and none but
     His.  Do you see that as far as you can no such thing ever happen again, on the face of His
     earth.  And from that day, sir, I gave myself up to that one thing, and will until I die, to
     save the poor young fellows like myself, who are left now-a-days to the Devil, body and soul,
     just when they are in the prime of their power to work for God.’
‘Ah!’ said Lancelot—‘if poor Luke’s spirit were but as strong as yours!’
‘I strong?’ answered he, with a sad smile; ‘and so you think, sir.  But it’s written, and
     it’s true—“The heart knoweth its own bitterness.”’
‘Then you absolutely refuse to try to fancy your—his present state?’
‘Yes, sir, because if I did fancy it, that would be a certain sign I didn’t know it.  If we
     can’t conceive what God has prepared for those that we know loved Him, how much less can we for
     them of whom we don’t know whether they loved Him or not?’
‘Well,’ thought Lancelot to himself, ‘I did not do so very wrong in trusting your intellect
     to cut through a sophism.’
‘But what do you believe, Tregarva?’
‘I believe this, sir—and your cousin will believe the same, if he will only give up, as I am
     sore afraid he will need to some day, sticking to arguments and doctrines about the Lord, and
     love and trust the Lord himself.  I believe, sir, that the judge of all the earth will do
     right—and what’s right can’t be wrong, nor cruel either, else it would not be like Him who
     loved us to the death, that’s all I know; and that’s enough for me.  To whom little is given,
     of him is little required.  He that didn’t know his Master’s will, will be beaten with few
     stripes, and he that did know it, as I do, will be beaten with many, if he neglects it—and that
     latter, not the former, is my concern.’
‘Well,’ thought Lancelot to himself, ‘this great heart has gone down to the root of the
     matter—the right and wrong of it.  He, at least, has not forgotten God.  Well, I would give up
     all the Teleologies and cosmogonies that I ever dreamt or read, just to believe what he
     believes—Heigho and well-a-day!—Paul! hist?  I’ll swear that was an otter!’
‘I hope not, sir, I’m sure.  I haven’t seen the spraint of one here this two years.’
‘There again—don’t you see something move under that marl bank?’
Tregarva watched a moment, and then ran up to the spot, and throwing himself on his face on
     the edge, leant over, grappled something—and was instantly, to Lancelot’s astonishment,
     grappled in his turn by a rough, lank, white dog, whose teeth, however, could not get through
     the velveteen sleeve.
‘I’ll give in, keeper!  I’ll give in.  Doan’t ye harm the dog! he’s deaf as a post, you
     knows.’
‘I won’t harm him if you take him off, and come up quietly.’
This mysterious conversation was carried on with a human head, which peeped above the water,
     its arms supporting from beneath the growling cur—such a visage as only worn-out poachers, or
     trampling drovers, or London chiffonniers carry; pear-shaped and retreating to a narrow peak
     above, while below, the bleared cheeks, and drooping lips, and peering purblind eyes,
     perplexed, hopeless, defiant, and yet sneaking, bespeak their share in the
     ‘inheritance of the kingdom of heaven.’—Savages without the resources of a savage—slaves
     without the protection of a master—to whom the cart-whip and the rice-swamp would be a change
     for the better—for there, at least, is food and shelter.
Slowly and distrustfully a dripping scarecrow of rags and bones rose from his hiding-place in
     the water, and then stopped suddenly, and seemed inclined to dash through the river; but
     Tregarva held him fast.
‘There’s two on ye!  That’s a shame!  I’ll surrender to no man but you, Paul.  Hold off, or
     I’ll set the dog on ye!’
‘It’s a gentleman fishing.  He won’t tell—will you, sir?’  And he turned to Lancelot.  ‘Have
     pity on the poor creature, sir, for God’s sake—it isn’t often he gets it.’
‘I won’t tell, my man.  I’ve not seen you doing any harm.  Come out like a man, and let’s
     have a look at you.’
The creature crawled up the bank, and stood, abject and shivering, with the dog growling from
     between his legs.
‘I was only looking for a kingfisher’s nest: indeed now, I was, Paul Tregarva.’
‘Don’t lie, you were setting night-lines.  I saw a minnow lie on the bank as I came up. 
     Don’t lie; I hate liars.’
‘Well indeed, then—a man must live somehow.’
‘You don’t seem to live by this trade, my friend,’ quoth Lancelot; ‘I cannot say it seems a
     prosperous business, by the look of your coat and trousers.’
‘That Tim Goddard stole all my clothes, and no good may they do him; last time as I went to
     gaol I gave them him to kep, and he went off for a navvy meantime; so there I am.’
‘If you will play with the dogs,’ quoth Tregarva, ‘you know what you will be bit by.  Haven’t
     I warned you?  Of course you won’t prosper: as you make your bed, so you must lie in it.  The
     Lord can’t be expected to let those prosper that forget Him.  What mercy would it be to you if
     He did let you prosper by setting snares all church-time, as you were last Sunday, instead of
     going to church?’
‘I say, Paul Tregarva, I’ve told you my mind about that afore.  If I don’t do what I knows to
     be right and good already, there ain’t no use in me a damning myself all the deeper by going to
     church to hear more.’
‘God help you!’ quoth poor Paul.
‘Now, I say,’ quoth Crawy, with the air of a man who took the whole thing as a matter of
     course, no more to be repined at than the rain and wind—‘what be you a going to do with me this
     time?  I do hope you won’t have me up to bench.  ’Tain’t a month now as I’m out o’ prizzum
     along o’ they fir-toppings, and I should, you see—’ with a look up and down and round at the
     gay hay-meadows, and the fleet water, and the soft gleaming clouds, which to Lancelot seemed
     most pathetic,—‘I should like to ha’ a spell o’ fresh air, like, afore I goes in again.’
Tregarva stood over him and looked down at him, like some huge stately bloodhound on a
     trembling mangy cur.  ‘Good heavens!’ thought Lancelot, as his eye wandered from the sad
     steadfast dignity of the one, to the dogged helpless misery of the other—‘can those two be
     really fellow-citizens? fellow-Christians?—even animals of the same species?  Hard to
     believe!’
True, Lancelot; but to quote you against yourself, Bacon, or rather the instinct which taught
     Bacon, teaches you to discern the invisible common law under the deceitful phenomena of
     sense.
‘I must have those night-lines, Crawy,’ quoth Tregarva, at length.
‘Then I must starve.  You might ever so well take away the dog.  They’re the life of me.’
‘They’re the death of you.  Why don’t you go and work, instead of idling about, stealing
     trout?’
‘Be you a laughing at a poor fellow in his trouble?  Who’d gie me a day’s work, I’d like to
     know?  It’s twenty year too late for that!’
Lancelot stood listening.  Yes, that wretch, too, was a man and a brother—at least so books
     used to say.  Time was, when he had looked on a poacher as a Pariah ‘hostem humani generis’—and
     only deplored that the law forbade him to shoot them down, like cats and otters; but he had
     begun to change his mind.
He had learnt, and learnt rightly, the self-indulgence, the danger, the cruelty, of
     indiscriminate alms.  It looked well enough in theory, on paper.  ‘But—but—but,’ thought
     Lancelot, ‘in practice, one can’t help feeling a little of that un-economic feeling called
     pity.  No doubt the fellow has committed an unpardonable sin in daring to come into the world
     when there was no call for him; one used to think, certainly, that children’s opinions were not
     consulted on such points before they were born, and that therefore it might be hard to visit
     the sins of the fathers on the children, even though the labour-market were a little
     overstocked—“mais nous avons changé tout cela,” like M. Jourdain’s doctors.  No doubt, too, the
     fellow might have got work if he had chosen—in Kamschatka or the Cannibal Islands; for the
     political economists have proved, beyond a doubt, that there is work somewhere or other for
     every one who chooses to work.  But as, unfortunately, society has neglected to inform him of
     the state of the Cannibal Island labour-market, or to pay his passage thither when informed
     thereof, he has had to choose in the somewhat limited labour-field of the Whitford Priors’
     union, whose workhouse is already every winter filled with abler-bodied men than he, between
     starvation—and this—.  Well, as for employing him, one would have thought that there was a
     little work waiting to be done in those five miles of heather and snipe-bog, which I used to
     tramp over last winter—but those, it seems, are still on the “margin of cultivation,” and not a
     remunerative investment—that is, to capitalists.  I wonder if any one had made Crawy a present
     of ten acres of them when he came of age, and commanded him to till that or be hanged, whether
     he would not have found it a profitable investment?  But bygones are bygones, and there he is,
     and the moors, thanks to the rights of property—in this case the rights of the dog in the
     manger—belong to poor old Lavington—that is, the game and timber on them; and neither Crawy nor
     any one else can touch them.  What can I do for him?  Convert him? to what?  For the next life,
     even Tregarva’s talisman seems to fail.  And for this life—perhaps if he had had a few more
     practical proofs of a divine justice and government—that “kingdom of heaven” of which Luke
     talks, in the sensible bodily matters which he does appreciate, he might not be so unwilling to
     trust to it for the invisible spiritual matters which he does not appreciate.  At all events,
     one has but one chance of winning him, and that is, through those five senses which he has
     left.  What if he does spend the money in gross animal enjoyment?  What will the amount of it
     be, compared with the animal enjoyments which my station allows me daily without reproach!  A
     little more bacon—a little more beer—a little more tobacco; at all events they will be more
     important to him than a pair of new boots or an extra box of cigars to me.’—And Lancelot put
     his hand in his pocket, and pulled out a sovereign.  No doubt he was a great goose; but if you
     can answer his arguments, reader, I cannot.
‘Look here—what are your night-lines worth?’
‘A matter of seven shilling; ain’t they now, Paul Tregarva?’
‘I should suppose they are.’
‘Then do you give me the lines, one and all, and there’s a sovereign for you.—No, I can’t
     trust you with it all at once.  I’ll give it to Tregarva, and he shall allow you four shillings
     a week as long as it lasts, if you’ll promise to keep off Squire Lavington’s river.’
It was pathetic, and yet disgusting, to see the abject joy of the poor creature.  ‘Well,’
     thought Lancelot, ‘if he deserves to be wretched, so do I—why, therefore, if we are one as bad
     as the other, should I not make his wretchedness a little less for the time being?’
‘I waint come a-near the water.  You trust me—I minds them as is kind to me’—and a thought
     seemed suddenly to lighten up his dull intelligence.
‘I say, Paul, hark you here.  I see that Bantam into D * * * t’other day.’
‘What! is he down already?’
‘With a dog-cart; he and another of his pals; and I see ’em take out a silk flue, I did.  So,
     says I, you maunt be trying that ere along o’ the Whitford trout; they kepers is out o’ nights
     so sure as the moon.’
‘You didn’t know that.  Lying again!’
‘No, but I sayed it in course.  I didn’t want they a-robbing here; so I think they worked
     mainly up Squire Vaurien’s water.’
‘I wish I’d caught them here,’ quoth Tregarva, grimly enough; ‘though I don’t think they
     came, or I should have seen the track on the banks.’
‘But he sayed like, as how he should be down here again about pheasant shooting.’
‘Trust him for it.  Let us know, now, if you see him.’
‘And that I will, too.  I wouldn’t save a feather for that ’ere old rascal, Harry.  If the
     devil don’t have he, I don’t see no use in keeping no devil.  But I minds them as has mercy on
     me, though my name is Crawy.  Ay,’ he added, bitterly, ‘’tain’t so many kind turns as I gets in
     this life, that I can afford to forget e’er a one.’  And he sneaked off, with the deaf dog at
     his heels.
‘How did that fellow get his name, Tregarva?’
‘Oh, most of them have nicknames round here.  Some of them hardly know their own real names,
     sir.’  (‘A sure sign of low civilisation,’ thought Lancelot.)  ‘But he got his a foolish way;
     and yet it was the ruin of him.  When he was a boy of fifteen, he got miching away in
     church-time, as boys will, and took off his clothes to get in somewhere here in this very
     river, groping in the banks after craw-fish; and as the devil—for I can think no less—would
     have it, a big one catches hold of him by the fingers with one claw, and a root with the other,
     and holds him there till Squire Lavington comes out to take his walk after church, and there he
     caught the boy, and gave him a thrashing there and then, naked as he stood.  And the story got
     wind, and all the chaps round called him Crawy ever afterwards, and the poor fellow got quite
     reckless from that day, and never looked any one in the face again; and being ashamed of
     himself, you see, sir, was never ashamed of anything else—and there he is.  That dog’s his only
     friend, and gets a livelihood for them both.  It’s growing old now; and when it dies, he’ll
     starve.’
‘Well—the world has no right to blame him for not doing his duty, till it has done its own by
     him a little better.’
‘But the world will, sir, because it hates its duty, and cries all day long, like Cain, “Am I
     my brother’s keeper?”’
‘Do you think it knows its duty?  I have found it easy enough to see that something is
     diseased, Tregarva; but to find the medicine first, and to administer it afterwards, is a very
     different matter.’
‘Well—I suppose the world will never be mended till the day of judgment.’
‘In plain English, not mended till it is destroyed.  Hopeful for the poor world!  I should
     fancy, if I believed that, that the devil in the old history—which you believe—had had the best
     of it with a vengeance, when he brought sin into the world, and ruined it.  I dare not believe
     that.  How dare you, who say that God sent His Son into the world to defeat the devil?’
Tregarva was silent a while.
‘Learning and the Gospel together ought to do something, sir, towards mending it.  One would
     think so.  But the prophecies are against that.’
‘As folks happen to read them just now.  A hundred years hence they may be finding the very
     opposite meaning in them.  Come, Tregarva,—Suppose I teach you a little of the learning, and
     you teach me a little of the Gospel—do you think we two could mend the world between us, or
     even mend Whitford Priors?’
‘God knows, sir,’ said Tregarva.
* * * * *
‘Tregarva,’ said Lancelot, as they were landing the next trout, ‘where will that Crawy go,
     when he dies?’
‘God knows, sir,’ said Tregarva.
* * * * *
Lancelot went thoughtful home, and sat down—not to answer Luke’s letter—for he knew no answer
     but Tregarva’s, and that, alas! he could not give, for he did not believe it, but only longed
     to believe it.  So he turned off the subject by a question—
‘You speak of yourself as being already a member of the Romish communion.  How is this?  Have
     you given up your curacy?  Have you told your father?  I fancy that if you had done so I must
     have heard of it ere now.  I entreat you to tell me the state of the case, for, heathen as I
     am, I am still an Englishman; and there are certain old superstitions still lingering among
     us—whencesoever we may have got them first—about truth and common honesty—you understand
     me.—
‘Do not be angry.  But there is a prejudice against the truthfulness of Romish priests and
     Romish converts.—It’s no affair of mine.  I see quite enough Protestant rogues and liars, to
     prevent my having any pleasure in proving Romanists, or any other persons, rogues and liars
     also.  But I am—if not fond of you—at least sufficiently fond to be anxious for your good
     name.  You used to be an open-hearted fellow enough.  Do prove to the world that cœlum, non
     animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt.’
