
CHAPTER X
In consequence of the registration under the Reform Act it was not possible for parliament
      to be dissolved, and an appeal made to the new constituency, until the end of the year. This
      was advantageous to Mr. Ferrars, and afforded him six months of personal security to arrange
      his affairs. Both husband and wife were proud, and were anxious to quit the world with
      dignity. All were so busy about themselves at that period, and the vicissitudes of life
      between continental revolutions and English reform so various and extensive, that it was not
      difficult to avoid the scrutiny of society. Mrs. Ferrars broke to Zenobia that, as her husband
      was no longer to be in parliament, they had resolved to retire for some time to a country
      life, though, as Mr. Ferrars had at length succeeded in impressing on his wife that their
      future income was to be counted by hundreds, rather than thousands, it was difficult for her
      to realise a rural establishment that should combine dignity and economy. Without, however,
      absolutely alleging the cause, she contrived to baffle the various propositions of this kind
      which the energetic Zenobia made to her, and while she listened with apparent interest to
      accounts of deer parks, and extensive shooting, and delightful neighbourhoods, would just
      exclaim, “Charming! but rather more, I fancy, than we require, for we mean to be very quiet
      till my girl is presented.”
That young lady was now thirteen, and though her parents were careful to say nothing in her
      presence which would materially reveal their real situation, for which they intended very
      gradually to prepare her, the scrutinising powers with which nature had prodigally invested
      their daughter were not easily baffled. She asked no questions, but nothing seemed to escape
      the penetrative glance of that large dark blue eye, calm amid all the mystery, and tolerating
      rather than sharing the frequent embrace of her parents. After a while her brother came home
      from Eton, to which he was never to return. A few days before this event she became unusually
      restless, and even agitated. When he arrived, neither Mr. nor Mrs. Ferrars was at home. He
      knocked gaily at the door, a schoolboy’s knock, and was hardly in the hall when his name was
      called, and he caught the face of his sister, leaning over the balustrade of the
      landing-place. He ran upstairs with wondrous speed, and was in an instant locked in her arms.
      She kissed him and kissed him again, and when he tried to speak, she stopped his mouth with
      kisses. And then she said, “Something has happened. What it is I cannot make out, but we are
      to have no more ponies.”
