
CHAPTER XIII
The ecclesiastical incident mentioned at the dinner described in our last chapter, produced
      a considerable effect in what is called society. Nigel Penruddock had obtained great celebrity
      as a preacher, while his extreme doctrines and practices had alike amazed, fascinated, and
      alarmed a large portion of the public. For some time he had withdrawn from the popular gaze,
      but his individuality was too strong to be easily forgotten, even if occasional paragraphs as
      to his views and conduct, published, contradicted, and reiterated, were not sufficient to
      sustain, and even stimulate, curiosity. That he was about to return to his native land, as the
      Legate of His Holiness, was an event which made many men look grave, and some female hearts
      flutter.
The memory of Lady Roehampton could not escape from the past, and she could not recall it
      and all the scenes at Hurstley without emotion; and Lady Montfort remembered with some pride
      and excitement, that the Legate of the Pope had been one of her heroes. It was evident that he
      had no wish to avoid his old acquaintances, for shortly after his arrival, and after he had
      assembled his suffragans, and instructed the clergy of his district, for dioceses did not then
      exist, Archbishop Penruddock, for so the Metropolitan of Tyre simply styled himself, called
      upon both these ladies.
His first visit was to Myra, and notwithstanding her disciplined self-control, her intense
      pride, and the deep and daring spirit which always secretly sustained her, she was nervous and
      agitated, but only in her boudoir. When she entered the saloon to welcome him, she seemed as
      calm as if she were going to an evening assembly.
Nigel was changed. Instead of that anxious and moody look which formerly marred the refined
      beauty of his countenance, his glance was calm and yet radiant. He was thinner, it might
      almost be said emaciated, which seemed to add height to his tall figure.
Lady Roehampton need not have been nervous about the interview, and the pain of its
      inevitable associations. Except one allusion at the end of his visit, when his Grace mentioned
      some petty grievance, of which he wished to relieve his clergy, and said, “I think I will
      consult your brother; being in the opposition, he will be less embarrassed than some of my
      friends in the government, or their supporters,” he never referred to the past. All he spoke
      of was the magnitude of his task, the immense but inspiring labours which awaited him, and his
      deep sense of his responsibility. Nothing but the Divine principle of the Church could sustain
      him. He was at one time hopeful that His Holiness might have thought the time ripe for the
      restoration of the national hierarchy, but it was decreed otherwise. Had it been accorded, no
      doubt it would have assisted him. A prelate in partibus is, in a certain sense, a
      stranger, whatever his duties, and the world is more willing when it is appealed to by one who
      has “a local habitation and a name;” he is identified with the people among whom he lives.
      There was much to do. The state of the Catholic poor in his own district was heartrending. He
      never could have conceived such misery, and that too under the shadow of the Abbey. The few
      schools which existed were wretched, and his first attention must be given to this capital
      deficiency. He trusted much to female aid. He meant to invite the great Catholic ladies to
      unite with him in a common labour of love. In this great centre of civilisation, and wealth,
      and power, there was need of the spirit of a St. Ursula.
No one seemed more pleased by the return of Archbishop Penruddock than Lord Montfort. He
      appeared to be so deeply interested in his Grace’s mission, sought his society so often,
      treated him with such profound respect, almost ceremony, asked so many questions about what
      was happening at Rome, and what was going to be done here—that Nigel might have been pardoned
      if he did not despair of ultimately inducing Lord Montfort to return to the faith of his
      illustrious ancestors. And yet, all this time, Lord Montfort was only amusing himself; a new
      character was to him a new toy, and when he could not find one, he would dip into the “Memoirs
      of St. Simon.”
Instead of avoiding society, as was his wont in the old days, the Archbishop sought it. And
      there was nothing exclusive in his social habits; all classes and all creeds, all conditions
      and orders of men, were alike interesting to him; they were part of the mighty community, with
      all whose pursuits, and passions, and interests, and occupations he seemed to sympathise, but
      respecting which he had only one object—to bring them back once more to that imperial fold
      from which, in an hour of darkness and distraction, they had miserably wandered. The
      conversion of England was deeply engraven on the heart of Penruddock; it was his constant
      purpose, and his daily and nightly prayer.
So the Archbishop was seen everywhere, even at fashionable assemblies. He was a frequent
      guest at banquets which he never tasted, for he was a smiling ascetic, and though he seemed to
      be preaching or celebrating high mass in every part of the metropolis, organising schools,
      establishing convents, and building cathedrals, he could find time to move philanthropic
      resolutions at middle-class meetings, attend learned associations, and even occasionally send
      a paper to the Royal Society.
The person who fell most under the influence of the archbishop was Waldershare. He was
      fairly captivated by him. Nothing would satisfy Waldershare till he had brought the archbishop
      and Prince Florestan together. “You are a Roman Catholic prince, sir,” he would say. “It is
      absolute folly to forego such a source of influence and power as the Roman Catholic Church.
      Here is your man; a man made for the occasion, a man who may be pope. Come to an understanding
      with him, and I believe you will regain your throne in a year.”
“But, my dear Waldershare, it is very true I am a Roman Catholic, but I am also the head of
      the Liberal party in my country, and perhaps also on the continent of Europe, and they are not
      particularly affected to archbishops and popes.”
“Old-fashioned twaddle of the Liberal party,” exclaimed Waldershare. “There is more true
      democracy in the Roman Catholic Church than in all the secret societies of Europe.”
“There is something in that,” said the prince musingly, “and my friends are Roman Catholics,
      nominally Roman Catholics. If I were quite sure your man and the priests generally were
      nominally Roman Catholics, something might be done.”
“As for that,” said Waldershare, “sensible men are all of the same religion.”
“And pray what is that?” inquired the prince.
“Sensible men never tell.”
Perhaps there was no family which suited him more, and where the archbishop became more
      intimate, than the Neuchatels. He very much valued a visit to Hainault, and the miscellaneous
      and influential circles he met there—merchant princes, and great powers of Lombard Street and
      the Stock Exchange. The Governor of the Bank happened to be a high churchman, and listened to
      the archbishop with evident relish. Mrs. Neuchatel also acknowledged the spell of his society,
      and he quite agreed with her that people should be neither so poor nor so rich. She had long
      mused over plans of social amelioration, and her new ally was to teach her how to carry them
      into practice. As for Mr. Neuchatel, he was pleased that his wife was amused, and liked the
      archbishop as he liked all clever men. “You know,” he would say, “I am in favour of all
      churches, provided, my lord archbishop, they do not do anything very foolish. Eh? So I shall
      subscribe to your schools with great pleasure. We cannot have too many schools, even if they
      only keep young people from doing mischief.”
