
CHAPTER XI
At the foot of the Berkshire downs, and itself on a gentle elevation, there is an old hall
      with gable ends and lattice windows, standing in grounds which once were stately, and where
      there are yet glade-like terraces of yew trees, which give an air of dignity to a neglected
      scene. In the front of the hall huge gates of iron, highly wrought, and bearing an ancient
      date as well as the shield of a noble house, opened on a village green, round which were
      clustered the cottages of the parish with only one exception, and that was the vicarage house,
      a modern building, not without taste, and surrounded by a small but brilliant garden. The
      church was contiguous to the hall, and had been raised by the lord on a portion of his domain.
      Behind the hall and its enclosure, the country was common land but picturesque. It had once
      been a beech forest, and though the timber had been greatly cleared, the green land was still
      occasionally dotted, sometimes with groups and sometimes with single trees, while the juniper
      which here abounded, and rose to a great height, gave a rich wildness to the scene, and
      sustained its forest character.
Hurstley had for many years been deserted by the family to which it belonged. Indeed, it was
      rather difficult to say to whom it did belong. A dreary fate had awaited an ancient, and, in
      its time, even not immemorable home. It had fallen into chancery, and for the last
      half-century had either been uninhabited or let to strangers. Mr. Ferrars’ lawyer was in the
      chancery suit, and knew all about it. The difficulty of finding a tenant for such a place,
      never easy, was increased by its remoteness from any railway communication, which was now
      beginning to figure as an important element in such arrangements. The Master in Chancery would
      be satisfied with a nominal rent, provided only he could obtain a family of consideration to
      hold under him. Mr. Ferrars was persuaded to go down alone to reconnoitre the place. It
      pleased him. It was aristocratic, yet singularly inexpensive. The house contained an immense
      hall, which reached the roof, and which would have become a baronial mansion, and a vast
      staircase in keeping; but the living rooms were moderate, even small, in dimensions, and not
      numerous. The land he was expected to take consisted only of a few meadows, which he could let
      if necessary, and a single labourer could manage the garden.
Mrs. Ferrars was so delighted with the description of the galleried hall, that she resolved
      on their taking Hurstley without even her previously visiting it. The only things she cared
      for in the country were a hall and a pony-chair.
All the carriages were sold, and all the servants discharged. Two or three maid-servants and
      a man who must be found in the country, who could attend them at table, and valet alike his
      master and the pony, was the establishment which was to succeed the crowd of retainers who had
      so long lounged away their lives in the saloons of Hill Street, and the groves and gardens of
      Wimbledon.
Mr. and Mrs. Ferrars and their daughter travelled down to Hurstley in a post-chaise;
      Endymion, with the servants, was sent by the stage-coach, which accomplished the journey of
      sixty miles in ten hours. Myra said little during the journey, but an expression of ineffable
      contempt and disgust seemed permanent on her countenance. Sometimes she shrugged her
      shoulders, sometimes she raised her eyebrows, and sometimes she turned up her nose. And then
      she gave a sigh; but it was a sigh not of sorrow, but of impatience. Her parents lavished
      attentions on her which she accepted without recognition, only occasionally observing that she
      wished she had gone with Endymion.
It was dusk when they arrived at Hurstley, and the melancholy hour did not tend to raise
      their spirits. However, the gardener’s wife had lit a good fire of beechwood in the
      drawing-room, and threw as they entered a pannier of cones upon the logs, which crackled and
      cheerfully blazed away. Even Myra seemed interested by the novelty of the wood fire and the
      iron dogs. She remained by their side, looking abstractedly on the expiring logs, while her
      parents wandered about the house and examined or prepared the requisite arrangements. While
      they were yet absent, there was some noise and a considerable bustle in the hall. Endymion and
      his retinue had arrived. Then Myra immediately roused herself, and listened like a startled
      deer. But the moment she caught his voice, an expression of rapture suffused her countenance.
      It beamed with vivacity and delight. She rushed away, pushed through the servants and the
      luggage, embraced him and said, “We will go over the house and see our rooms together.”
Wandering without a guide and making many mistakes, fortunately they soon met their parents.
      Mrs. Ferrars good-naturedly recommenced her labours of inspection, and explained all her
      plans. There was a very pretty room for Endymion, and to-morrow it was to be very comfortable.
      He was quite pleased. Then they were shown Myra’s room, but she said nothing, standing by with
      a sweet scoff, as it were, lingering on her lips, while her mother disserted on all the
      excellences of the chamber. Then they were summoned to tea. The gardener’s wife was quite a
      leading spirit, and had prepared everything; the curtains were drawn, and the room lighted; an
      urn hissed; there were piles of bread and butter and a pyramid of buttered toast. It was
      wonderful what an air of comfort had been conjured up in this dreary mansion, and it was
      impossible for the travellers, however wearied or chagrined, to be insensible to the
      convenience and cheerfulness of all around them.
When the meal was over, the children sate together in whispering tattle. Mrs. Ferrars had
      left the room to see if all was ready for their hour of retirement, and Mr. Ferrars was
      walking up and down the room, absorbed in thought.
“What do you think of it all, Endymion?” whispered Myra to her twin.
“I rather like it,” he said.
She looked at him with a glance of blended love and mockery, and then she said in his ear,
      “I feel as if we had fallen from some star.”
