
CHAPTER XXIX
When Endymion arrived in London he found among his letters two brief notes from Lady
      Montfort; one hurriedly written at Montfort Castle at the moment of her departure, and another
      from Princedown, with these words only, “All is over.” More than a week had elapsed since the
      last was written, and he had already learnt from the newspapers that the funeral had taken
      place. It was a painful but still necessary duty to fulfil, to write to her, which he did, but
      he received no answer to his letter of sympathy, and to a certain degree, of condolence. Time
      flew on, but he could not venture to write again, and without any absolute cause for his
      discomfort, he felt harassed and unhappy. He had been so accustomed all his life to exist
      under the genial influence of women that his present days seemed lone and dark. His sister and
      Berengaria, two of the most gifted and charming beings in the world, had seemed to agree that
      their first duty had ever been to sympathise with his fortunes and to aid them. Even his
      correspondence with Myra was changed. There was a tone of constraint in their communications;
      perhaps it was the great alteration in her position that occasioned it? His heart assured him
      that such was not the case. He felt deeply and acutely what was the cause. The subject most
      interesting to both of them could not be touched on. And then he thought of Adriana, and
      contrasted his dull and solitary home in Hill Street with what it might have been, graced by
      her presence, animated by her devotion, and softened by the sweetness of her temper.
Endymion began to feel that the run of his good fortune was dried. His sister, when he had a
      trouble, would never hear of this; she always held that the misery and calamities of their
      early years had exhausted the influence of their evil stars, and apparently she had been
      right, and perhaps she would have always been right had he not been perverse, and thwarted her
      in the most important circumstances of his life.
In this state of mind, there was nothing for him to do but to plunge into business; and
      affairs of state are a cure for many cares and sorrows. What are our petty annoyances and
      griefs when we have to guard the fortunes and the honour of a nation?
The November cabinets had commenced, and this brought all the chiefs to town, Sidney Wilton
      among them; and his society was always a great pleasure to Endymion; the only social pleasure
      now left to him was a little dinner at Mr. Wilton’s, and little dinners there abounded. Mr.
      Wilton knew all the persons that he was always thinking about, but whom, it might be noticed,
      they seemed to agree now rarely to mention. As for the rest, there was nobody to call upon in
      the delightful hours between official duties and dinner. No Lady Roehampton now, no brilliant
      Berengaria, and not even the gentle Imogene with her welcome smile. He looked in at the
      Coventry Club, a club of fashion, and also much frequented by diplomatists. There were a good
      many persons there, and a foreign minister immediately buttonholed the Under-Secretary of
      State.
“I called at the Foreign Office to-day,” said the foreign minister. “I assure you it is very
      pressing.”
“I had the American with me,” said Endymion, “and he is very lengthy. However, as to your
      business, I think we might talk it over here, and perhaps settle it.” And so they left the
      room together.
“I wonder what is going to happen to that gentleman,” said Mr. Ormsby, glancing at Endymion,
      and speaking to Mr. Cassilis.
“Why?” replied Mr. Cassilis, “is anything up?”
“Will he marry Lady Montfort?”
“Poh!” said Mr. Cassilis.
“You may poh!” said Mr. Ormsby, “but he was a great favourite.”
“Lady Montfort will never marry. She had always a poodle, and always will have. She was
      never so liee with Ferrars as with the Count of Ferroll, and half a dozen others. She
      must have a slave.”
“A very good mistress with thirty thousand a year.”
“She has not that,” said Mr. Cassilis doubtingly.
“What do you put Princedown at?” said Mr. Ormsby.
“That I can tell you to a T,” replied Mr. Cassilis, “for it was offered to me when old
      Rambrooke died. You will never get twelve thousand a year out of it.”
“Well, I will answer for half a million consols,” said Ormsby, “for my lawyer, when he made
      a little investment for me the other day, saw the entry himself in the bank-books; our names
      are very near, you know—M, and O. Then there is her jointure, something like ten thousand a
      year.”
“No, no; not seven.”
“Well, that would do.”
“And what is the amount of your little investment in consols altogether, Ormsby?”
“Well, I believe I top Montfort,” said Mr. Ormsby with a complacent smile, “but then you
      know, I am not a swell like you; I have no land.”
“Lady Montfort, thirty thousand a year,” said Mr. Cassilis musingly. “She is only thirty.
      She is a woman who will set the Thames on fire, but she will never marry. Do you dine to-day,
      by any chance, with Sidney Wilton?”
When Endymion returned home this evening, he found a letter from Lady Montfort. It was a
      month since he had written to her. He was so nervous that he absolutely for a moment could not
      break the seal, and the palpitation of his heart was almost overpowering.
Lady Montfort thanked him for his kind letter, which she ought to have acknowledged before,
      but she had been very busy—indeed, quite overwhelmed with affairs. She wished to see him, but
      was sorry she could not ask him to come down to Princedown, as she was living in complete
      retirement, only her aunt with her, Lady Gertrude, whom, she believed, he knew. He was aware,
      probably, how good Lord Montfort had been to her. Sincerely she could say, nothing could have
      been more unexpected. If she could have seen her husband before the fatal moment, it would
      have been a consolation to her. He had always been kind to Endymion; she really believed
      sometimes that Lord Montfort was even a little attached to him. She should like Endymion to
      have some souvenir of her late husband. Would he choose something, or would he leave it to
      her?
One would rather agree, from the tone of this letter, that Mr. Cassilis knew what he was
      talking about. It fell rather odd on Endymion’s heart, and he passed a night of some
      disquietude; not one of those nights, exactly, when we feel that the end of the world has at
      length arrived, and that we are the first victim, but a night when you slumber rather than
      sleep, and wake with the consciousness of some indefinable chagrin.
This was a dull Christmas for Endymion Ferrars. He passed it, as he had passed others, at
      Gaydene, but what a contrast to the old assemblies there! Every source of excitement that
      could make existence absolutely fascinating seemed then to unite in his happy fate. Entrancing
      love and the very romance of domestic affection, and friendships of honour and happiness, and
      all the charms of an accomplished society, and the feeling of a noble future, and the present
      and urgent interest in national affairs—all gone, except some ambition which might tend to
      consequences not more successful than those that had ultimately visited his house with
      irreparable calamity.
The meeting of parliament was a great relief to Endymion. Besides his office, he had now the
      House of Commons to occupy him. He was never absent from his place; no little runnings up to
      Montfort House or Hill Street just to tell them the authentic news, or snatch a hasty repast
      with furtive delight, with persons still more delightful, and flattering one’s self all the
      time that, so far as absence was concerned, the fleetness of one’s gifted brougham horse
      really made it no difference between Mayfair and Bellamy’s.
Endymion had replied, but not very quickly, to Lady Montfort’s letter, and he had heard from
      her again, but her letter requiring no reply, the correspondence had dropped. It was the
      beginning of March when she wrote to him to say, that she was obliged to come to town to see
      her lawyer and transact some business; that she would be “at papa’s in Grosvenor Square,”
      though the house was shut up, on a certain day, that she much wished to see Endymion, and
      begged him to call on her.
It was a trying moment when about noon he lifted the knocker to Grosvenor Square. The door
      was not opened rapidly, and the delay made him more nervous. He almost wished the door would
      never open. He was shown into a small back room on the ground floor in which was a bookcase,
      and which chamber, in the language of Grosvenor Square, is called a library.
“Her ladyship will see you presently,” said the servant, who had come up from
      Princedown.
Endymion was standing before the fire, and as nervous as a man could well be. He sighed, and
      he sighed more than once. His breathing was oppressed; he felt that life was too short to
      permit us to experience such scenes and situations. He heard the lock of the door move, and it
      required all his manliness to endure it.
She entered; she was in weeds, but they became her admirably; her countenance was grave and
      apparently with an effort to command it. She did not move hurriedly, but held out both her
      hands to Endymion and retained his, and all without speaking. Her lips then seemed to move,
      when, rather suddenly, withdrawing her right hand, and placing it on his shoulder and burying
      her face in her arm, she wept.
He led her soothingly to a seat, and took a chair by her side. Not a word had yet been
      spoken by either of them; only a murmur of sympathy on the part of Endymion. Lady Montfort
      spoke first.
“I am weaker than I thought, but it is a great trial.” And then she said how sorry she was,
      that she could not receive him at Princedown; but she thought it best that he should not go
      there. “I have a great deal of business to transact—you would not believe how much. I do not
      dislike it, it occupies me, it employs my mind. I have led so active a life, that solitude is
      rather too much for me. Among other business, I must buy a town house, and that is the most
      difficult of all affairs. There never was so great a city with such small houses. I shall feel
      the loss of Montfort House, though I never used it half so much as I wished. I want a mansion;
      I should think you could help me in this. When I return to society, I mean to receive. There
      must be therefore good reception rooms; if possible, more than good. And now let us talk about
      our friends. Tell me all about your royal sister, and this new marriage; it rather surprised
      me, but I think it excellent. Ah! you can keep a secret, but you see it is no use having a
      secret with me. Even in solitude everything reaches me.”
“I assure you most seriously, that I can annex no meaning to what you are saying.”
“Then I can hardly think it true; and yet it came from high authority, and it was not told
      me as a real secret.”
“A marriage, and whose?”
“Miss Neuchatel’s,—Adriana.”
“And to whom?” inquired Endymion, changing colour.
“To Lord Waldershare.”
“To Lord Waldershare!”
“And has not your sister mentioned it to you?”
“Not a word; it cannot be true.”
“I will give to you my authority,” said Lady Montfort. “Though I came here in the twilight
      of a hired brougham, and with a veil, I was caught before I could enter the house by, of all
      people in the world, Mrs. Rodney. And she told me this in what she called ‘real confidence,’
      and it was announced to her in a letter from her sister, Lady Beaumaris. They seem all
      delighted with the match.”
