<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Rachel Gray: A Tale
     Founded on Fact</title><author>Kavanagh, Julia (1824-1877).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary
     History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="17">
CHAPTER XVII.
And now, alas! fairly began the Teapot's downward course. Every effort of Richard Jones to
     rise, only made him sink the deeper. To use a worn out, though expressive phrase, he stirred
     heaven and earth to get better tea; but the spell to conjure it forth was wanting. Jones had
     very correctly stated the case to his daughter—he had not credit; he had little or no cash;
     what he purchased in small quantities, he bought dear; and he sold as he bought. And thus,
     unable to compete with superior, capital and energy, he declined day by day.
But if he fell, it was not without a struggle. He turned desperate, and resorted to a
     desperate expedient; he sold his goods at prime cost, and left himself without profit. But
     Jones did not care; all he wanted was to crush his opponent—that object accomplished, and he
     once more sole master of the field, he could make his own price, and gradually retrieve lost
     time, and heal the wounds received in the battle.
Business requires a cool head; competition has its limits, beyond which yawns the bottomless
     pit of ruin. Jones lost his temper, and with it his judgment. Not satisfied with the faint
     change for the better, produced by the first measure, he impatiently resolved "to settle that
     Saunders," by a second and still bolder stroke. He filled his shop-windows with placards, on
     which prices were marked, with notes of admiration. He pressed into his service a dozen of
     little boys, whose sole business was to slip bills under doors, and to throw them down areas,
     or to force them into the hands of unconscious passengers; and he crowned an these arts by
     selling under prime cost.
The customers could not resist this tender appeal to their feelings; they came back one and
     all—the Teapot once more was full—the two Teapots was deserted; and Richard Jones was
     triumphant.
We profess no particular regard for Joseph Saunders; but we cannot deny that he played his
     cruel game skilfully and well. He did not bring down his prices one farthing. Without emotion
     he saw his shop forsaken—he knew his own strength; he knew, too, the weakness of his enemy.
"Oh! It's that dodge you are after," he thought, thrusting his tongue in his cheek. "Well,
     then, it has beggared many a man before you; and we shall see how long you'll keep it up—that's
     all."
And to whosoever liked to hear, Saunders declared that Mr. Jones was selling at loss, and
     that he (Saunders) could not afford to do so; and was sorry the old man would be so obstinate.
     "Where was the use, when he could not go on?"
Nothing did Jones more harm than this assertion, and the knowledge that it was a literal
     truth; for though people worship cheapness, that goddess of modern commerce, it is only on
     condition that she shall be a reality, not a fiction; that she shall rest on the solid basis of
     gains, howsoever small; not on the sand foundation of loss, that certain forerunner of failure.
     Jones could not, of course, long keep up the plan of selling under cost; he was obliged to give
     it up. With it, ceased his fallacious and momentary prosperity.
"I thought so," soliloquized Saunders.
Reader, if you think that we mean to cast a stone at the great shop, you are mistaken. We
     deal not with pitiless political economy, with its laws, with their workings. The great shop
     must prosper; 'tis in the nature of things; and the little shop must perish—'tis in their
     nature too. We but lament this sad truth, that on God's earth, which God made for all, there
     should be so little room for the poor man; for his pride, his ambition, his desires, which he
     has in common with the rich man; we but deplore what all, alas! know too well; that the crown
     of creation, a soul, a man by God's Almighty mind, fashioned and called forth into being, by
     Christ's priceless blood purchased and redeemed to Heaven, should be a thing of so little
     worth—ay, so much, so very much less worth than some money, in this strange world of ours.
Few pitied Richard Jones in his fall. His little ambition was remembered as a crime; for
     success had not crowned it. His little vanities were so many deadly sins; for gold did not hide
     or excuse them. To the dregs, the unhappy man drank the latter draught which rises to the lips
     of the fallen, when they see the world deserting them to worship a rival. A usurper had invaded
     his narrow realm, and crushed him; his little story was a true page from that great book of
     History, which we need not read to know how power decays, or to learn of man's fickleness, and
     fortune's frowns. Alas! History, if we did but know it, lies around us, as mankind lives in the
     meanest wretch we meet, and perchance despise.
It is a bitter thing to behold our own ruin; it is a cruel thing to look on powerless and
     despairing; and both now fell to the lot of Richard Jones. He had ventured all, and lost all.
     He was doomed—he knew it; every one knew it. But, alas! the cup of his woes was not full.
Mary had always been delicate. One chill evening she took cold; a cough settled on her chest;
     sometimes it seemed gone, then suddenly it returned again. "She felt very well," she said; and,
     strange to say, her father thought so too. Rachel was the first to see that something was
     wrong.
"Mary," she said to her, one morning, "what ails you? Your breath seems quite short."
"La! bless you, Miss," replied Mary, in her patronizing way, "I am all right."
They were alone; Rachel looked at the young girl; her eyes glittered; her cheeks were red
     with a hectic flush; her breathing was quick and oppressive. The eyes of Rachel filled with
     tears; she thought of her little dead sister in her grave.
"Mary," she said, "do not work any more to-day—go home."
Mary looked up in her face, and laughed—the gay laugh of an unconscious child, fearless of
     death.
"Why, Miss, you are crying!" she exclaimed, amazed.
"Am I?" said Rachel, trying to smile, "never mind, Mary; go home—or, rather, take this parcel
     to Mrs. Jameson, number three, Albert Terrace. It is a fine day—the walk will do you good."
Mary jumped up, charmed at the prospect. She tied her bonnet-strings before the
     looking-glass, and hummed the tune of "Meet me by moonlight alone." Mary was turned sixteen;
     and vague ideas of romance sometimes fitted through her young brain.
When she was fairly gone, Rachel rose, laid her work by, put on her bonnet and shawl, and
     quietly slipped round to the Teapot: ostensibly, she wanted to buy some tea: her real purpose
     was to call the attention of Mr. Jones to his daughter's state.
But, strange to say, Rachel Gray could not make him understand her; his mind was full of the
     two Teapots; of the villany of that Saunders; of the world's ingratitude; of his misfortunes
     and his wrongs.
"I dare say Mary feels it too," put in Rachel.
"Of course she does, Miss Gray—of course she does. The child has feelings. And then you know,
     Miss Gray, if that fellow hadn't a come there, why, you know, we were getting on as well as
     could be."
"I notice that she coughs," said Rachel
"Why, yes, poor child; she can't get rid of that cough—she's growing, you see. And then, you
     see, that Saunders—"
"And her breathing is so short," interrupted Rachel.
"Sure to be, on account of the cough. And, as I was saying, that Saunders—"
"But, Mr. Jones, don't you think you had better see a doctor?" again interrupted Rachel.
"See a doctor!" exclaimed Jones, staring at her. "You don't mean to say my child is ill, Miss
     Gray?"
"I don't think she is quite well, Mr. Jones," replied Rachel, trembling as she said so.
He sank down on his seat behind the counter, pale as death. The obstinate cough, the short
     breathing, the hectic flush, all rushed back to his memory; unseen, unheeded, till then, they
     now told him one fearful story. With trembling hand he wiped away the drops of cold
     perspiration from his forehead.
"The doctor must see her directly," he said, "directly. I'll go and look for him, and you'll
     send her round. It's nothing—nothing at all, I am sure; she's growing, you see. But still, it
     must be attended to, you know —it must be attended to."
A light laugh at the door interrupted him. He turned round, and saw Mary looking in at him
     and Rachel Gray, through the glass windows; with another laugh, she vanished. Rachel went to
     the door, and called her back.
"Mary, Mary, your father wants you."
The young girl came in; and, for the first time, her father seemed to see the bright red spot
     that burned on her cheek, the unnatural brilliancy of her blue eyes, the painful shortness of
     her breath. A mist seemed to fall from his eyes, and the dread truth to stand revealed before
     him; but he did not speak, nor did Rachel; Mary looked at them both, wondering.
"Well, what ails you two, that you stare at me so," she said, pertly. "I am so hot," she
     added, after a while. "I think I shall stay at home, as you said. Miss Gray."
She went into the back parlour, and sat down on the first chair she found at hand. Rachel
     Gray and her father followed her in. The poor child, who, because she had felt no actual pain,
     had thought that she could not be ill, now, for the first time, felt that she was so.
"What ails you, dear?" softly asked Rachel, bending over her, as she saw her gradually
     turning pale.
"La! bless you. Miss Gray, I am quite well—only I feel so faint like."
And even as she spoke, her head sank on the bosom of Rachel—she had fainted.
When Mary recovered to consciousness, she was lying on her bed, up stairs. Rachel stood by
     her pillow. At the foot of her bed, Mary caught sight of her father's face, ghastly pale.
     Between the two, she saw a strange gentleman, a doctor, who felt her pulse, put a few questions
     to her, wrote a prescription, and soon left.
"I must go now," said Rachel, "but I shall come back this evening, and bring my work."
Jones did not heed her; he looked stupified and like one bereft of sense, but Mary laughed
     and replied, "Oh! do Miss Gray, come and take tea with us."
Rachel promised that she would try, kissed her and left. With great difficulty she obtained
     from Mrs. Brown the permission to return.
They on whom the light of this world shone not, were rarely in the favour of Mrs. Brown. And
     only on condition of being home early did she allow Rachel to depart. Before leaving, she went
     up to her other's chair, he was not now quite so helpless as at first, and did not require her
     constant presence or assistance; though he still did not know her.
"I shall try and not be too long away," said Rachel in a low voice.
"Never mind," he muttered, shaking his head, "never mind."
"There's a precious old fool for you!" said Mrs. Brown laughing coarsely.
A flush of pain crossed Rachel's cheek, but to have replied, would have been to draw down a
     storm on her head; she silently left the house.
She found Mary feverish, restless, and full of projects. She would get up early the next day,
     and make up for lost time. She remembered all the work she had to do, and which she had
     unaccountably neglected. Her father's shirts to mend, her own wardrobe to see to; the next room
     to clean up, for a second lodger had never been found; in short, to hear her, it seemed as if
     her life had only begun, and that this was the day of its opening. In vain Rachel tried to
     check her soothingly; Mary talked on and was so animated and so merry, that her father, who
     came up every five minutes to see how she was, could not believe her to be so very ill as Miss
     Gray thought, or the Doctor had hinted. Indeed, when at nine Rachel left, and he let her down
     stairs, he seemed quite relieved.
"The child's only growing," he said to Rachel, "only growing; a little rest and a little
     medicine, and she'll be all right again."
But scarcely was Rachel out of the door, when she burst into tears. "My poor little Mary,"
     she thought, "my poor little Mary!"
</div></body></text></TEI>