
CHAPTER IX.
But Bébée, who only saw in the sun the sign of daily work, the brightness of the face of the
     world, the friend of the flowers, the harvest-man of the poor, the playmate of the birds and
     butterflies, the kindly light that the waking birds and the ringing carillon welcomed,—Bébée,
     who was not at all afraid of him, smiled at his rays and saw in them only fairest promise of a
     cloudless midsummer day as she gave her last crumb to the swallows, dropped down off the
     thatch, and busied herself in making bread that Mère Krebs would bake for her, until it was
     time to cut her flowers and go down into the town.
When her loaves were made and she had run over with them to the mill-house and back again,
     she attired herself with more heed than usual, and ran to look at her own face in the mirror of
     the deep well-water—other glass she had none.
She was used to hear herself called pretty; bat she had never thought about it at all till
     now. The people loved her; she had always believed that they had only said it as a sort of
     kindness, as they said, "God keep you." But now—
"He told me I was like a flower," she thought to herself, and hung over the well to see. She
     did not know very well what he had meant; but the sentence stirred in her heart as a little
     bird under tremulous leaves.
She waited ten minutes full, leaning and looking down, while her eyes, that were like the
     blue iris, smiled back to her from the brown depths below. Then she went and kneeled down
     before the old shrine in the wall of the garden.
"Dear and holy Mother of Jesus, I do thank you that you made me a little good to look at,"
     she said, softly. "Keep me as you keep the flowers, and let my face be always fair, because it
     is a pleasure to be a pleasure. Ah, dear Mother, I say it so badly, and it sounds so
     vain, I know. But I do not think you will be angry, will you? And I am going to try to be
     wise."
Then she murmured an ave or two, to be in form as it were, and then rose and ran along the
     lanes with her baskets, and brushed the dew lightly over her bare feet, and sang a little
     Flemish song for very joyousness, as the birds sing in the apple bough.
She got the money for Annémie and took it to her with fresh patterns to prick, and the
     new-laid eggs.
"I wonder what he meant by a dog's heart?" she thought to herself, as she left the old woman
     sitting by the hole in the roof pricking out the parchment in all faith that she earned her
     money, and looking every now and then through the forests of masts for the brig with the hank
     of flax flying,—the brig that had foundered fifty long years before in the northern seas, and
     in the days of her youth.
"What is the dog's heart?" thought Bébée; she had seen a dog she knew—a dog which all his
     life long had dragged heavy loads under brutal stripes along the streets of Brussels—stretch
     himself on the grave of his taskmaster and refuse to eat, and persist in lying there until he
     died, though he had no memory except of stripes, and no tie to the dead except pain and sorrow.
     Was it a heart like this that he meant?
"Was her sailor, indeed, so good to her?" she asked an old gossip of Annémie's, as she went
     down the stairs.
The old soul stopped to think with difficulty of such a far-off time, and resting her brass
     flagon of milk on the steep step.
"Eh, no; not that I ever saw," she answered at length. "He was fond of her—very fond; but he
     was a wilful one, and he beat her sometimes when he got tired of being on land. But women must
     not mind that, you know, my dear, if only a man's heart is right. Things fret them, and then
     they belabor what they love best; it is a way they have."
"But she speaks of him as of an angel nearly!" said Bébée, bewildered.
The old woman took up her flagon, with a smile flitting across her wintry face.
"Ay, dear; when the frost kills your brave rose-bush, root and bud, do you think of the
     thorns that pricked you, or only of the fair, sweet-smelling things that flowered all your
     summer?"
Bébée went away thoughtfully out of the old crazy water-washed house by the quay; life seemed
     growing very strange and intricate and knotted about her, like the threads of lace that a bad
     fairy has entangled in the night.
