
CHAPTER XXIV.
Full winter came.
The snow was deep, and the winds drove the people with whips of ice along the dreary country
     roads and the steep streets of the city. The bells of the dogs and the mules sounded sadly
     through the white misty silence of the Flemish plains, and the weary horses slipped and fell on
     the frozen ruts and on the jagged stones in the little frost-shut Flemish towns. Still the
     Flemish folk were gay enough in many places.
There were fairs and kermesses; there were puppet plays and church feasts; there were sledges
     on the plains and skates on the canals; there were warm woollen hoods and ruddy wood fires;
     there were tales of demons and saints, and bowls of hot onion soup; sugar images for the little
     children, and blessed beads for the maidens clasped on rosy throats with lovers' kisses; and in
     the city itself there was the high tide of the winter pomp and mirth, with festal scenes in the
     churches, and balls at the palaces, and all manner of gay things in toys and jewels, and music
     playing cheerily under the leafless trees, and flashes of scarlet cloth, and shining furs, and
     happy faces, and golden curls, in the carriages that climbed the Montagne de la Cour, and
     filled the big place around the statue of stout Godfrey.
In the little village above St. Guido, Bébée's neighbors were merry too, in their simple
     way.
The women worked away wearily at their lace in the dim winter light, and made a wretched
     living by it, but all the same they got penny playthings for their babies, and a bit of cake
     for their Sunday-hearth. They drew together in homely and cordial friendship, and of an
     afternoon when dusk fell wove their lace in company in Mère Krebs's mill-house kitchen with the
     children and the dogs at their feet on the bricks, so that one big fire might serve for all,
     and all be lighted with one big rush candle, and all be beguiled by chit-chat and songs,
     stories of spirits, and whispers of ghosts, and now and then when the wind howled at its worst,
     a paternoster or two said in common for the men toiling in the barges or drifting up the
     Scheldt.
In these gatherings Bébée's face was missed, and the blithe soft sound of her voice, like a
     young thrush singing, was never heard.
The people looked in, and saw her sitting over a great open book; often her hearth had no
     fire.
Then the children grew tired of asking her to play; and their elders began to shake their
     heads; she was so pale and so quiet, there must be some evil in it—so they began to think.
Little by little people dropped away from her. Who knew, the gossips said, what shame or sin
     the child might not have on her sick little soul?
True, Bébée worked hard just the same, and just the same was seen trudging to and fro in the
     dusk of dawns and afternoons in her two little wooden shoes. She was gentle and laborious, and
     gave the children her goat's milk, and the old women the brambles of her garden.
But they grew afraid of her—afraid of that sad, changeless, far-away look in her eves, and of
     the mute weariness that was on her—and, being perplexed, were sure, like all ignorant
     creatures, that what was secret must be also vile.
So they hung aloof, and let her alone, and by and by scarcely nodded as they passed her but
     said to Jeannot,—
"You were spared a bad thing, lad: the child was that grand painter's light-o'-love, that is
     plain to see. The mischief all comes of the stuff old Antoine filled her head with—a stray
     little by-blow of chickweed that he cockered up like a rare carnation. Oh! do not fly in a
     rage, Jeannot; the child is no good, and would have made an honest man rue. Take heart of
     grace, and praise the saints, and marry Katto's Lisa."
But Jeannot would never listen to the slanderers, and would never look at Lisa, even though
     the door of the little hut was always closed against him; and whenever he met Bébée on the
     highway she never seemed to see him more than she saw the snow that her sabots were
     treading.
One night in the midwinter-time old Annémie died.
Bébée found her in the twilight with her head against the garret window, and her left side
     all shrivelled and useless. She had a little sense left, and a few fleeting breaths to
     draw.
"Look for the brig," she muttered. "You will not see the flag at the masthead for the fog
     to-night; but his socks are dry and his pipe is ready. Keep looking—keep looking—she will be in
     port to-night."
But her dead sailor never came into port; she went to him. The poor, weakened, faithful old
     body of her was laid in the graveyard of the poor, and the ships came and went under the empty
     garret window, and Bébée was all alone.
She had no more anything to work for, or any bond with the lives of others. She could live on
     the roots of her garden and the sale of her hens' eggs, and she could change the turnips and
     carrots that grew in a little strip of her ground for the quantity of bread that she
     needed.
So she gave herself up to the books, and drew herself more and more within from the outer
     world. She did not know that the neighbors thought very evil of her; she had only one idea in
     her mind—to be more worthy of him against he should return.
The winter passed away somehow, she did not know how.
It was a long, cold, white blank of frozen silence: that was all. She studied hard, and had
     got a quaint, strange, deep, scattered knowledge out of her old books; her face had lost all
     its roundness and color, but, instead, the forehead had gained breadth and the eyes had the dim
     fire of a student's.
Every night when she shut her volumes she thought,—
"I am a little nearer him. I know a little more."
Just so every morning, when she bathed her hands in the chilly water, she thought to herself,
     "I will make my skin as soft as I can for him, that it may be like the ladies' he has
     loved."
Love to be perfect must be a religion, as well as a passion. Bébée's was so. Like George
     Herbert's serving-maiden, she swept no specks of dirt away from a floor without doing it to the
     service of her lord.
Only Bébée's lord was a king of earth, made of earth's dust and vanities.
But what did she know of that?
