

CHAPTER XVI.IN THE HOUSE OF THE ACTOR.
 Hardly had Eboracus conveyed Domitia out of the Forum into a place of safety, than a rush
      of people down the street threatened to drive him back in the direction whence he had come.
      The drifting mob, as it cascaded down, cried: “The Prætorians are coming from their camp!” 
 It was so. Down the hill by the Tiburtine way marched a compact body of soldiery. 
 The danger was imminent; Eboracus and his young charge were between two masses of military,
      entangled in a seething mob of frightened people, mostly of the lowest class. 
 “My lady!” said the slave. “There is but one thing to be done.” 
 He drew her to a door, knocked, and when a voice asked who demanded admittance, answered, 
 “Open speedily—Paris!” 
 The door was furtively unbarred and opened sufficiently to admit the slave and Domitia, and
      then hastily bolted and locked again. 
 “Excuse me, dear mistress,” said Eboracus. “I could do no other. In this
       insula live the actor Paris and Glyceria. They were both slaves in your
      household, but were given their freedom by your father, my
      late master, when he went to the East. They will place themselves at your
      service, and offer you shelter in their humble dwelling, the first flat on the right.” 
 The house was one of those insulæ, islets of Rome in which great numbers
      of the lower classes were housed. They consisted in square blocks, built about a court, and
      ran to the height of seven and even more stories. The several flats were reached by stone
      stairs that ran from the central yard to the very summit of these barrack-like buildings. They
      vastly resembled our modern model lodging-houses, with one exception, that they had no
      exterior windows, or at most only slits looking into the street; doors and windows opened into
      the central quadrangle. These houses were little towns, occupied by numerous families, each
      family renting two or more chambers on a flat, and as in a city there are diversities in rank,
      so was it in these lodging-houses; the most abjectly poor were at the very top, or on the
      ground floor. The first flat commanded the highest rent, and the price of rooms gradually
      dwindled, the greater the elevation was. Glass was too great a luxury, far too costly to be
      employed except by the most wealthy for filling their windows. Even talc was expensive; in its
      place thin films of agate were sometimes used; but among the poor there was little protection
      in their dwellings against cold. The doors admitted light and air and cold together, and were
      always open, except at night, and then a perforation in the wood, or a small window in the
      wall, too narrow to allow of ingress, served for ventilation. 
 In a huge block of building like the insula, there were no chimneys. All
      cooking was done at the
      hearth in the room that served as kitchen and dining-room, often also as bedroom,
      and the smoke found its way out at the doorway into the central court. 
 But, in fact, little cooking of food was done, except the boiling of pulse. The meals of
      the poor consisted mainly of salads and fruit, with oil in abundance. 
 Dressed always in wool, in cold weather multiplying their wraps, the Roman citizens felt
      the cold weather much less than we might suppose possible. In the rain—and in Rome in winter
      it raineth almost every day—the balconies were crowded, and then the women wove, men tinkered
      or patched sandals, children romped, boys played marbles and knuckle-bones, and sometimes a
      minstrel twanged a lyre and the young girls danced to keep themselves warm. There were little
      braziers, moreover, one on every landing, that were kept alight with charcoal, and here, when
      the women’s fingers were numb, they were thawed, and children baked chestnuts or roasted
      apples. 
 Domitia had never been in one of these blocks of habitations of the lower classes before,
      and she was surprised. The quadrangle was almost like an amphitheatre, with its tiers of seats
      for spectators; but here, in place of seats, were balconies, and every balcony was alive with
      women and children. Men were absent; they had gone out to see the commencement of the
      Saturnalia, and of women there were few compared to the numbers that usually thronged these
      balconies. 
 Eboracus conducted his young mistress up the first flight of steps, and at once a rush of
      children was made to him to ask for toys and cakes. He brushed them aside, and when the
      mothers saw by the purple edge to her dress that Domitia belonged to a noble family,
      they called their youngsters away, and saluted her by raising thumb and
      forefinger united to the lips. 
 The slave at once conducted Domitia through a doorway into a little chamber, where burnt a
      fire of olive sticks, and a lamp was suspended, by the light of which she could see that a
      sick woman lay on a low bed. 
 Domitia shrank back; but Eboracus said encouragingly: 
 “Be not afraid, dear young mistress; this is no catching disorder; Glyceria suffers from an
      accident, and will never be well again. She is the sister of your servant Euphrosyne.” 
 Then, approaching the sick woman, he hastily explained the reason for his taking refuge
      with his mistress in this humble lodging. 
 The sick woman turned to Domitia with a sweet smile, and in courteous words entreated her
      to remain in her chamber so long as was necessary. 
 “My husband, Paris, the actor, is now out; but he will be home shortly, I trust—unless,”
      her face grew paler with sudden dread, “some ill have befallen him. Yet I think not that can
      be, he is a quiet, harmless man.” 
 “I thank you,” answered Domitia, and took a seat offered her by Eboracus. 
 She looked attentively at the sick woman’s face. She was no longer young, she had at one
      time been beautiful, she had large, lustrous dark eyes, and dark hair, but pain and weakness
      had sharpened her features. Yet there was such gentleness, patience, love in her face, a
      something which to Domitia was so new, a something so new in that old world, that she could
      not
      take her eyes off her, wondering what the fascination was. 
 Glyceria did not speak again, modestly waiting till the lady of rank chose to address her. 
 Presently Domitia asked: 
 “Have you been long ill?” 
 “A year, lady.” 
 “And may I inquire how it came about?” 
 “Alas! It is a sad story. My little boy——” 
 “You have a son?” 
 “I had——” 
 “I ask your pardon for the interruption; say on.” 
 “My little boy was playing in the street, when a chariot was driven rapidly down the hill,
      and I saw that he would be under the horses’ feet, so I made a dart to save him.” 
 “And then?” 
 “I was too late to rescue him, and I fell, and the wheel went over me. I have been unable
      to rise since.” 
 “What! like this for all these months! What say the doctors?” 
 “Alack, lady! they give me no hope.” 
 “But for how long may this last?” 
 “I cannot say.” 
 “As the gods love me! if this befell me, I should refuse my food and starve myself to
      death!” 
 “I cannot do that.” 
 “What! you lack the resolution?” 
 “I can bear what is on me laid by God.” 
 “There is no need to endure what can be avoided. I would make short work of it, were this
      my lot. And your husband?” 

 “He is here.” 
 Through the door came the actor, a handsome man, of Greek type, with a package in his arms.
      He would have walked straight to his wife, but had to turn at the door and drive off a
      clamorous pack of urchins who had pursued him, believing that he was laden with toys. 
 “There, Glyceria!” he exclaimed joyously; “they are all for you. There is such a riot and
      disturbance and such a crush in the street, that I had hard work to push through. I misdoubt
      me some are broken.” 
 “Oh, Paris! do you not observe?” 
 “What? I see nothing but thy sweet face?” 
 “Our dear master’s daughter, the lady Domitia Longina.” 
 The actor turned sharply, and was covered with confusion at the unexpected sight, and
      almost let his parcel fall. 
 Eboracus explained the circumstances. Then Paris expressed his happiness, and the pride he
      felt in being honored by the visit under his humble ceiling, of the lady, the daughter of the
      good and beloved master who had given him and Glyceria their freedom. 
 “Go forth, Eboracus,” said Domitia, “and I prithee learn how it has fared with my mother.
      Bring me word speedily, if thou canst.” 
 When the slave had withdrawn, she addressed Paris and Glyceria. 
 “I beseech you, suffer me to remain here in quiet, and concern not yourselves about me. I
      have been alarmed, and this has shaken me. I would fain rest in this seat and not speak. Go on
      with what ye have to say and do, and consider me not. So will you best please me.” 

 The actor was somewhat constrained at first, but after a little while overcame his reserve.
      He drew a low table beside his wife’s couch, and, stooping on one knee, began to unlade his
      bundle. He set out a number of terra cotta figures on the table, representing cocks and hens,
      pigs, horses, cows and men; some infinitely comical; at them Glyceria laughed. 
 Then, as she put forth a thin white hand to take up one of the quaintest images, Domitia
      noticed that Paris laid hold of it, and pressed it to his lips. 
 A lump rose in the girl’s throat. 
 “No,” thought she; “if I had one so to love me and consider me, though I were sick and in
      pain, I would not shorten my days. I would live to enjoy his love.” 
 Then again, falling into further musing, she said to herself: 
 “In time to come, if it chance that I become ill, will my Lamia be to me as is this actor
      to his poor wife? Will he think of and care for me? But—and if evil were to befall him, would
      not I minister to him, care for him night and day, and seek to relieve his sorrow? Would I
      grow indifferent when he most needed me? Then why think that he should become cold and neglect
      me? Are women more inclined to be true than men?—Yet see this actor—this Paris. By the Gods!
      Is Lamia like to be a more ignoble man than a poor freedman that gains his living on the
      stage?—I should even be happy serving him sick and suffering. Happy in doing my duty.” 
 And still musing, she said on to herself: 
 “Duty! Yes, I should find content and rest of mind in that; but to what would it all lead?
      Only to a heap of dust in the end. His light would be extinguished,
      and then I, having nothing else to live for, would die also—by mine own
      hand:—there is nothing beyond. It all leads to an ash-heap.” 
 Glyceria, observing the girl’s fixed eye, thought it was looking inquiringly at her, and
      said in her gentle voice that vibrated with the tremulousness given by suffering: 
 “Ah, lady! the neighbors and their children are very kind. There is more of goodness and
      piety in the world than you would suppose, seeing men and women only in an amphitheatre. I can
      do but very little. One boy fetches me water—that is Bibulus, and my Paris has bought him this
      little horseman—and Torquata, a little girl, daughter of a cobbler, she sweeps the floor; and
      Dosithea, that is a good widow’s child; she does other neighborly acts for me;—and they thrust
      me on my bed to the side of the hearth, and bring me such things as I need, that I may prepare
      the meals for my husband. And Claudia, the wife of a seller of nets, she makes my bed for me;
      but all the shopping is done for me by Paris, and I warrant you, lady, he is quite knowing,
      and can haggle over a fish or a turnip with a market-woman like any housewife.” 
 “He is very good to you,” said Domitia. 
 Then Paris turned, and, putting his hand on his wife’s mouth, said: 
 “Lady! you can little know what a wife my Glyceria is to me. I had rather for my own sake
      have her thus than hale as of old. Somehow, sorrow and pain draw hearts together wondrously.” 
 “He is good,” said Glyceria, twisting her mouth from his covering hand. “We have had a hard
      year; on
      account of the troubles, there has been little desire among the people for the
      theatre, and he has earned but a trifle. I have cost him much in physicians that have done me
      no good, yet he never grumbles, he is always cheerful, always tender-hearted and loving.” 
 “Hush, wife!” said Paris. “The lady desires rest. Keep silence.” 
 Then again Domitia fell a-musing, and the player and his wife whispered to each other about
      the destination of the several toys. 
 Somehow she had hitherto not thought of the classes of men and women below her station as
      having like feelings, like longings, like natures to her own. They had been to her as puppets,
      even as those clay figures ranged on the table, mostly grotesque. Now that great pulse of love
      that throbs through the world of humanity made itself felt, it was as though scales fell from
      her eyes, and the puppets became beings of flesh and blood to be considered, capable of
      happiness and of suffering, of virtue as well as of vice. 
 “I have a little lamp here—with a fish—the fish on it,” said Paris in a whisper.
      “It is for Luke, the Physician.” 
 “What!” exclaimed Domitia, starting from her reverie, “you know him? We had a talk once,
      and it was broken off and never concluded. I would hear the end of what he was saying—some
      day.” 
