

CHAPTER II.AN ILL-OMEN.
 It was even so. 
 The young girl had coaxed the big Briton to take her in a boat to the galley, so as to meet
      and embrace her father, before he came on shore. 
 She was a peculiarly affectionate child, and jealous to boot. She knew that, so soon as he
      landed, his whole attention would be engrossed by her very exacting mother, who moreover would
      keep her in the background, and would chide should the father divert his notice from herself
      to his child. 
 She was therefore determined to be the first to salute him, and to receive his endearments,
      and to lavish on him her affection, unchecked by her mother. 
 As for the slave, he knew that he would get into trouble if he complied with the girl’s
      request, but he was unable to resist her blandishments. 
 And now Domitia reached the side of the galley, and a rope was cast to the boat, caught by
      Eboracus, who shipped his oars, and the little skiff was made fast to the side of the vessel. 
 The eyes of the father had already recognized his child. Domitia stood in the bows and
      extended her arms, poised on tiptoe, as if, like a bird about to leap into the air and fly to
      his embrace. 



 And now he caught her hand, looked into her dancing, twinkling eyes, as drops of the very
      Ægean itself, set in her sweet face, and in another moment she was clinging round his neck,
      and sobbing as though her heart would break, yet not with sorrow, but through excess of
      otherwise inexpressible joy. 
 For an hour she had him to herself—all to herself—the dear father whom she had not seen for
      half a year, to tell him how she loved him, to hear about himself, to pour into his ear her
      story of pleasures and pains, great pleasures and trifling pains. 
 And yet—no, not wholly uninterrupted was the meeting and sweet converse, for the father
      said: 
 “My darling, hast thou no word for Lucius?” 
 “Lamia! He is here?” 
 The father, Cnæus Domitius Corbulo, with a smile turned and beckoned. 
 Then a young man, with pleasant, frank face, came up. He had remained at a distance, when
      father and daughter met, but had been unable to withdraw his eyes from the happy group. 
 “Domitia, you have not forgotten your old playmate, have you?” 
 With a light blush like the tint on the petal of the rose of June, the girl extended her
      hand. 
 “Nay, nay!” said Corbulo. “A gentler, kinder greeting, after so long a separation.” 
 Then she held up her modest cheek, and the young man lightly touched it with his lips. 
 She drew herself away and said: 
 “You will not be angry if I give all my thoughts and words and looks to my father now. When
      we come on shore, he will be swallowed up by others.” 

 Lamia stepped back. 
 “Do not be offended,” she said with a smile, and the loveliest, most bewitching dimples
      came into her cheeks. “I have not indeed been without thought of you, Lucius, but have spun
      and spun and weaved too, enough to make you a tunic, all with my own hands, and a purple
       clavus—it nigh ruined me, the dyed Tyrian wool cost—I will not say; but I wove little crossed L’s into the texture.” 
 “What,” said Corbulo. “For Lucius and Longina?” 
 The girl became crimson. 
 Lamia came to her succor. “That could not be,” said he, “for Longina and Lucius are never
      across, but alack! Lucius is often so with Lamia, when he has done some stupid thing and he
      sees a frown on his all but father’s face, but hears no word of reproach.” 
 “My boy,” said Corbulo, “when a man knows his own faults, then a reprimand is unnecessary,
      and what is unnecessary is wrong.” 
 Lamia bowed and retired. 
 And now again father and daughter were alone together in the prow observing the arc of the
      harbor in which the ship was gliding smoothly. 
 And now the sailors had out their poles and hooks, and they ran the vessel beside the
      wharf, and cast out ropes that were made fast to bronze rings in the marble breasting of the
      quay. 
 Domitia would at once have drawn her father on shore, but he restrained her. 
 “Not yet, my daughter,” he said; “the goddess must precede thee.” 
 And now ensued a singular formality. 

 From the bows of the vessel, the captain and steerer took a statuette of Artemis, in
      bronze, the Ephesian goddess, with female head and numerous breasts, but with the lower limbs
      swaddled, and the swaddling bands decorated with representations of all kinds of beasts,
      birds, and fishes. 
 This image was now conveyed on shore, followed by the passengers and crew. 
 On the quay stood an altar, upon which charcoal ever burnt, under the charge of a priest
      who attended to it continuously, and whenever a ship entered the port or was about to leave,
      added fuel, and raked and blew up the fire. 
 Simultaneously from a small temple on the quay issued a priest with veiled head, and his
      attendants came to the altar, cast some grains of incense on the embers, and as the blue
      fragrant smoke arose and was dissipated by the sea breeze, he said:— 
 “The Goddess Aphrodite of Corinth salutes her divine sister, the Many-Breasted Artemis of
      Ephesus, and welcomes her. And she further prays that she may not smite the city or the port
      with fire, pestilence or earthquake.” 
 Then captain, steerman, pilot and the rest of the company advanced in procession to the
      temple, and on reaching it offered a handful of sweet gums on an altar there, before the image
      of the foam-born goddess of Beauty, and said:— 
 “We who come from the sea, having safely traversed the Ægean, escaped rocks and sand-banks,
      whirlpools and storms, under the protection of the great goddess of Ephesus, salute in her
      name the goddess of Beauty, and receive her welcome with thankfulness. And great
      Artemis beseeches her sister to suffer her and the vessel with passengers and
      goods and crew, that she conducts and protects, to pass across the isthmus, without let and
      molestation; and she for her part undertakes to pay the accustomed toll, and the due to the
      temple of Aphrodite, and that neither the passengers nor the crew shall in any way injure or
      disturb the inhabitants of Corinth or of the Isthmus.” 
 This ceremony concluded, all were at liberty to disperse; the sailors to attend to the
      vessel, the slaves of Corbulo to look to and land such of his luggage as he was likely to
      want, and Corbulo to go to his wife, who had placed herself in an attitude to receive him. 
 The captain, at the same time, entered the harbor-master’s office to arrange about the
      crossing of the isthmus, and to settle tolls. 
 For the vessel was not to make more stay than a few days at the port of Cenchræa. After
      Longa Duilia was ready, then she and her husband and family were to proceed to Lechæum, the
      port on the Corinthian Gulf, there to embark for Italy. The vessel would leave the harbor and
      go to Diolchus, that point of the Isthmus on the east where the neck of land was narrowest.
      There the ships would be hauled out of the water, placed on rollers, and by means of oxen,
      assisted by gangs of slaves, would convey the vessel over the land for six miles to the Gulf
      of Corinth, where again she would be floated. 
 Immediately behind the Roman general, Corbulo, the father of Domitia, walked two
      individuals, both wearing long beards, and draped to the feet. 
 One of these had a characteristically Oriental head.
      His eyes were set very close together, his nose was aquiline, his tint sallow, his
      eyebrows heavy and bushy, and his general expression one of cunning and subtlety. His
      movements were stately. 
 The other was not so tall. He was clumsy in movement, rugged in feature, with a broken
      nose, his features distinctly Occidental, as was his bullet head. His hair was sandy, and
      scant on his crown. He wore a smug, self-complacent expression on his pursed-up lips and had a
      certain “I am Sir Oracle, let no dog bark” look in his pale eyes. 
 These two men, walking side by side, eyed each other with ill-concealed dislike and
      disdain. 
 The former was a Chaldæan, who was usually called Elymas, but affected in Greek to be named
      Ascletarion. 
 The latter was an Italian philosopher who had received his training in Greece at a period
      when all systems of philosophy were broken up and jostled each other in their common ruin. 
 No sooner was the ceremony at an end, and Corbulo had hastened from the wharf to meet and
      embrace his wife, and Lamia had drawn off Domitia for a few words, than these two men left to
      themselves instinctively turned to launch their venom at each other. 
 The philosopher, with a toss of his beard, and a lifting of his light eyebrows, and the
      protrusion of his lower lip said: 
 “And pray, what has the profundity of Ascletarion alias Elymas beheld in the bottom of that
      well he terms his soul?” 
 “He has been able to see what is hidden from the
      shallowness of Claudius Senecio alias Spermologos over
      the surface of which shallowness his soul careers like a water spider.” 
 “And that is, O muddiness?” 
 “Ill-luck, O insipidity.” 
 “Why so?—not, the Gods forfend, that I lay any weight on anything you may say. But I like
      to hear your vaticinations that I may laugh over them.” 
 “Hear, then. Because a daughter of Earth dared to set foot on the vessel consecrated to and
      conducted by Artemis before that the tutelary goddess had been welcomed by and had saluted the
      tutelary deity of the land.” 
 “I despise your prophecies of evil, thou crow.” 
 “Not more than do I thy platitudes, O owl!” 
 “Hearken to the words of the poet,” said the philosopher, and he started quoting the Œdipus
      Tyrannus: “The Gods know the affairs of mortals. But among men, it is by no means certain that
      a soothsayer is of more account than myself!” And Senecio snapped his fingers in the face of
      the Magus. 
 “Conclude thy quotation,” retorted Elymas. ““A man’s wisdom may surpass Wisdom itself.
      Therefore never will I condemn the seer, lest his words prove true.” How like you that?” and
      he snapped his fingers under the nose of the philosopher. 
