
CHAPTER II. THE MYSTERIES OF THE OLD HOUSE.
FORTUNATELY for the interesting young stranger, the individuals who had just entered the
      house did not attempt the door of the room in which he had taken refuge. They proceeded
      straight—and with a steadiness which seemed to indicate that they knew the locality well—to
      the front chamber upon the same floor.
In a few moments there was a sharp grating noise along the wall; and then a light suddenly
      shone into the room where the young stranger was concealed. He cast a terrified glance around,
      and beheld a small square window in the wall, which separated the two apartments. It was about
      five feet from the floor—a height which permitted the youth to avail himself of it, in order
      to reconnoitre the proceedings in the next room.
By means of a candle which had been lighted by the aid of a lucifer-match, and which stood
      upon a dirty deal table, the young stranger beheld two men, whose outward appearance did not
      serve to banish his alarm. They were dressed like operatives of the most humble class. One
      wore a gabardine and coarse leather gaiters, with laced-up boots; the other had on a fustian
      shooting-jacket and long corduroy trousers. They were both dirty and unshaven. The one with
      the shooting-jacket had a profusion of hair about his face, but which was evidently not well
      acquainted with a comb: the other wore no whiskers, but his beard was of three or four days'
      growth. Both were powerful, thick-set, and muscular men; and the expression of their
      countenances was dogged, determined, and ferocious.
The room to which they had betaken themselves was cold, gloomy, and dilapidated. It was
      furnished with the deal table before mentioned, and three old crazy chairs, upon two of which
      the men now seated themselves. But they were so placed that they commanded, their door being
      open, a full view of the landing-place; and thus the youthful stranger deemed it impolitic to
      attempt to take his departure for the moment.
"Now, Bill, out with the bingo," said the man in the gabardine to his companion.
"Oh! you're always for the lush, you are, Dick," answered the latter in a surly tone,
      producing at the same time a bottle of liquor from the capacious pocket of his fustian coat.
      "But I wonder how the devil it is that Crankey Jem ain't come yet. Who the deuce could have
      left that infernal door open?"
"Jem or some of the other blades must have been here and left it so. It don't matter; it
      lulls suspicion."
"Well, let's make the reglars all square," resumed the man called Bill, after a moment's
      pause; "we'll then booze a bit, and talk over this here new job of our'n."
      
"Look alive, then," said Dick; and he forthwith took from beneath his gabardine several
      small parcels done up in brown paper.
The other man likewise divested the pockets of his fustian coat of divers packages; and all
      these were piled upon the table.
A strange and mysterious proceeding then took place.
The person in the fustian coat approached the chimney, and applied a small turnscrew, which
      he took from his pocket, to a screw in the iron frame-work of the rusty grate. In a few
      moments he was enabled to remove the entire grate with his hands; a square aperture of
      considerable dimensions was then revealed. Into this place the two men thrust the parcels
      which they had taken from their pockets: the grate was replaced, the screws were fastened once
      more, and the work of concealment was complete.
The one in the gabardine then advanced towards that portion of the wall which was between
      the two windows; and the youth in the adjoining room now observed for the first time that the
      shutters of those windows were closed, and that coarse brown paper had been pasted all over
      the chinks and joints. Dick applied his hand in a peculiar manner to the part of the wall just
      alluded to, and a sliding panel immediately revealed a capacious cupboard. Thence the two men
      took food of by no means a coarse description, glasses, pipes, and tobacco; and, having
      hermetically closed the recess once more, seated themselves at the table to partake of the
      good cheer thus mysteriously supplied.
The alarm of the poor youth in the next chamber, as he contemplated these extraordinary
      proceedings, may be better conceived than depicted. His common sense told him that he was in
      the den of lawless thieves—perhaps murderers; in a house abounding with the secret means of
      concealing every kind of infamy. His eyes wandered away from the little window that had
      enabled him to observe the above-described proceedings, and glanced fearfully around the room
      in which he was concealed. He almost expected to see the very floor open beneath his feet. He
      looked down mechanically as this idea flitted through his imagination; and to his horror and
      dismay he beheld a trap-door in the floor. There was no mistaking it: there it was—about three
      feet long and two broad, and a little sunken beneath the level of its frame-work.
Near the edge of the trap-door lay an object which also attracted the youth's attention and
      added to his fears. It was a knife with a long blade pointed like a dagger. About three inches
      of this blade was covered with a peculiar rust: the youth shuddered; could it be human blood
      that had stained that instrument of death?
Every circumstance, however trivial, aided, in such a place as that, to arouse or confirm
      the worst fears, the most horrible suspicions.
The voices of the two men in the next room fell upon the youth's ear; and, perceiving that
      escape was still impracticable, he determined to gratify that curiosity which was commingled
      with his fears.
"Well, now, about this t'other job, Dick?" said Bill.
"It's Jem as started it," was the reply. "But he told me all about it, and so we may as well
      talk it over. It's up Islington way—up there between Kentish Town and Lower Holloway."
"Who's crib is it?"
"A swell of the name of Markham. He is an old fellow, and has two sons. One, the eldest, is
      with his regiment; t'other, the youngest, is only about fifteen, or so—a mere kid."
"Well, there's no danger to be expected from him. But what about the flunkies?"
"Only two man-servants and three vimen. One of the man-servants is the old butler, too fat
      to do any good; and t'other is a young tiger."
"And that's all?"
"That's all. Now you, and I, and Jem is quite enough to crack that there crib. When is it to
      be done?"
"Let's say to-morrow night; there is no moon now to speak on, and business in other quarters
      is slack."
"So be it. Here goes, then, to the success of our new job at old Markham's;" and as the
      burglar uttered these words he tossed off a bumper of brandy.
This example was followed by his worthy companion; and their conversation then turned upon
      other topics.
"I say, Bill, this old house has seen some jolly games, han't it?"
"I should think it had too. It was Jonathan Wild's favourite crib; and he was no fool at
      keeping things dark."
"No, surely. I dare say the well-staircase in the next room there, that's covered over with
      the trap-door, has had many a dead body flung down it into the Fleet."
"Ah! and without telling no tales too. But the trap-door has been nailed over for some years
      now."
The unfortunate youth in the adjacent chamber was riveted in silent horror to the spot, as
      these fearful details fell upon his ears.
"Why was the trap-door nailed down?"
"'Cos there's no use for that now, since the house is uninhabited, and no more
      travellers comes to lodge here. Besides, if we wanted to make use of such a conwenience,
      there's another——"
A loud clap of thunder prevented the remainder of this sentence from reaching the youth's
      ears.
"I've heard it said that the City is going to make great alterations in this quarter,"
      observed Dick, after a pause. "If so be they comes near us, we must shift our quarters."
"Well, and don't we know other cribs as good as this—and just under the very nose of the
      authorities too? The nearer you gets to them the safer you finds yourself. Who'd think now
      that here, and in Peter-street, and on Saffron-hill too, there was such cribs as this? Lord,
      how such coves as you and me does laugh when them chaps in the Common Council and the House of
      Commons gets on their legs and praises the blue-bottles up to the skies as the most acutest
      police in the world, while they wotes away the people's money to maintain 'em!"
"Oh! as for alterations, I don't suppose there'll be any for the next twenty years to come.
      They always talks of improvements long afore they begins 'em."
"But when they do commence, they won't spare this lovely old crib! It 'ud go to my
      heart to see them pull it about. I'd much sooner take and shove a dozen stiff uns myself down
      the trap than see a single rafter of the place ill-treated—that I would."
"Ah! if so be as the masons does come to pull its old carcass about, there'll be some fine
      things
       made known to the world. Them cellars down stairs, in which a man might hide for
      fifty years and never be smelt out by the police, will turn up a bone or two, I rather
      suspect; and not of a sheep, nor a pig, nor a bull neither."
"Why—half the silly folks in this neighbourhood are afeerd to come here even in the daytime,
      because they say it's haunted," observed Bill, after a brief pause. "But, for my part, I
      shouldn't be frightened to come here at all hours of the night, and sit here alone too, even
      if every feller as was scragged at Tyburn or Newgate, and every one wot has been tumbled down
      these holes into the Fleet, was to start up, and——"
The man stopped short, turned ghastly pale, and fell back stupified and speechless in his
      chair. His pipe dropped from between his fingers, and broke to pieces upon the floor.
"What the devil's the matter now?" demanded his companion, casting an anxious glance
      around.
"There! there! don't you see——," gasped the terrified ruffian, pointing towards the little
      window looking into the next room.
"It's only some d——d gammon of Crankey Jem," ejaculated Dick, who was more courageous in
      such matters than his companion. "I'll deuced soon put that to rights!"
Seizing the candle, he was hurrying towards the door, when his comrade rushed after him,
      crying, "No—I won't be left in the dark! I can't bear it! Damme, if you go, I'll go with
      you!"
The two villains accordingly proceeded together into the next room.
