
CHAPTER LXXI. THE HOUSE OF COMMONS.
THE building in which the representatives of the nation assemble at Westminster, is about as
      insignificant, ill-contrived, and inconvenient a place as can be well conceived. It is true
      that the edifices appropriated to both Lords and Commons are both only temporary ones;
      nevertheless, it would have been easy to construct halls of assembly more suitable for their
      purposes than those that now exist.
The House of Commons is an oblong, with rows of plain wooden benches on each side, leaving a
      space in the middle which is occupied by the table, whereon petitions are laid. At one end of
      this table is the mace: at the other, sit the clerks who record all proceedings that require
      to be noted. Close behind the clerks, and at one extremity of the apartment, is the Speaker's
      chair: galleries surround this hall of assembly;—the one for the reporters is immediately over
      the Speaker's chair; that for strangers occupies the other extremity of the oblong; and the
      two side ones are for the use of the members. The ministers and their supporters occupy the
      benches on the right of the speaker: the opposition members are seated on those to the left of
      that functionary. There are also cross-benches under the strangers' gallery, where those
      members who fluctuate between ministerial and opposition opinions, occasionally supporting the
      one side or the other according to their pleasure or convictions, take their places.
At each extremity of the house there is a lobby—one behind the cross-benches, the other
      behind the Speaker's chair, between which and the door of this latter lobby there is a high
      screen surmounted by the arms of the united kingdom. When the House divides upon any question,
      those who vote for the motion or bill pass into one lobby, and those who vote against the
      point to question proceed to the other. Each party appoints its tellers, who station
      themselves at the respective doors of the two lobbies and count the members on either side as
      they return into the house.
The house is illuminated with bude-lights, and is ventilated by means of innumerable holes
      perforated through the floor, which is covered with thick hair matting.
According to the above-mentioned arrangements of benches, it is evident that the orator, in
      whatever part he may sit, almost invariably has a considerable number of members behind him,
      or, at all events, sitting in places extremely inconvenient for hearing. Then, the apartment
      itself is so miserably confined, that when there is a full attendance of members, a least a
      fourth cannot obtain seats.
It will scarcely be believed by those previously unaware of the fact, that the reporters for
      the public press are only allowed to attend and take notes of the proceedings upon
       sufferance. Any one member can procure the clearance of both the reporters' and the
      strangers' galleries, without assigning any reason whatever.
      [76]
At half-past four o'clock the members began to enter the home pretty thickly.
Near the table stood a portly happy-looking man, with a somewhat florid and good-natured
      countenance, grey eyes, and reddish hair. He was well dressed, and wore enormous watch-seals
      and a massive gold guard-chain. He conversed in an easy and complacent manner with a few
      members who had gathered around him, and who appeared to receive his opinions with respect and
      survey him with profound admiration: this was Sir Robert Peel.
One of his principal admirers on this (as on all other occasions) was a very stout
      gentleman, with dark hair, prominent features, a full round face, eyes of a sleepy expression,
      and considerable heaviness of tone and manner: this was Sir James Graham.
Close by Sir James Graham, with whom he exchanged frequent signs of approval as Sir Robert
      Peel was conversing, was a small and somewhat repulsive looking individual, with red hair,
      little eyes that kept constantly blinking, a fair complexion, and diminutive features,—very
      restless in manner, and with a disagreeable and ill-tempered expression of countenance. When
      he spoke, there was for more of gall than honey in his language; and the shafts of his satire,
      though dealt at his political opponents, not infrequently glanced aside and struck his
      friends. This was Lord Stanley.
Shortly before the Speaker took the chair, a stout burly man, accompanied by half-a-dozen
      representatives of the Emerald Isle, entered the house. He was enveloped in a cloak, which he
      proceeded to doff in a very leisurely manner, and then turned to make some observation to his
      companions. They immediately burst out into a hearty laugh—for it was a joke that had fallen
      upon their ears—a joke, too, purposely delivered in the richest Irish brogue, and, accompanied
      by so comical an expression of his round good-natured countenance that the jest was altogether
      irresistible. He then proceeded slowly to his seat, saying something good-natured to his
      various political friends as he passed along. His broad-brimmed hat he retained upon his head,
      but of his cloak he made a soft seat. His adherents immediately crowded around him; and while
      he told them some rich racy anecdote, or delivered himself of another jest, his broad Irish
      countenance expanded into an expression of the most hearty and heart-felt good-humour. And yet
      that man had much to occupy his thoughts and engage his attention; for he of whom we now speak
      was Daniel O'Connell.
Close by Mr. O'Connell's place was seated a gentleman of most enormously portly form, though
      little above the middle height. On the wrong side of sixty, he was as hale, robust, and
      healthy-looking a man as could be seen. His ample chest, massive limbs, ponderous body, and
      large head denoted strength of no ordinary kind. His hair was iron-grey, rough, and bushy; his
      eyes large, grey, and intelligent; his countenance rigid in expression, although broad and
      round in shape. This was Joseph Hume.
Precisely at a quarter to five the Speaker took the chair; Mr. Greenwood was then introduced
      by the Tory whipper-in, and (as the papers said next morning) "took the oaths and his seat for
      Rottenborough."
The Whig whipper-in surveyed him with a glance of indignant disappointment; but Mr.
      Greenwood affected not to notice the feeling which his conduct had excited. On the contrary,
      he passed over to the Opposition benches (for it must be remembered that the Whigs then
      occupied the ministerial seat) where his accession to the Tory ranks was very warmly
      greeted—being the more pleasant as it was totally unexpected—by Sir Robert Peel and the other
      leaders of that party.
Mr. Greenwood was not a man to allow the grass to grow under his feet. He accordingly
      delivered his "maiden speech" that very evening. The question before the House was connected
      with the condition of the poor. The new member was fortunate enough to catch the Speaker's eye
      in the course of the debate; and he accordingly delivered his sentiments upon the topic.
He declared that the idea of a diminution of duties upon foreign produce was a mere
      delusion. The people, he said, were in a most prosperous condition—they never were more
      prosperous; but they were eternal grumblers whom nothing could satisfy. Although some of the
      most enlightened men in the kingdom devoted themselves to the interests of the people—he
      alluded to the party amongst whom he had the honour to sit—the people were not satisfied. For
      his part, he thought that there was too much of what was called freedom. He would
      punish all mal-contents with a little wholesome exercise upon the tread-mill. What
      presumption, he would like to know, could be greater than that of the millions daring to have
      an opinion of their own, unless it were the audacity of attempting to make that opinion the
      rule for those who sate in that House? He was astounded when he heard the misrepresentations
      that had just met his ears from honourable gentlemen opposite relative to the condition of the
      working classes. He could prove that they ought to put money in the savings-banks; and yet it
      was coolly alleged that in entire districts they wanted bread. Well—why did they not live upon
      potatoes? He could demonstrate, by the evidence of chemists and naturalists, that potatoes
      were far more wholesome than bread; and for his part he was much attached to potatoes. Indeed,
      he often ate his dinner without touching a single mouthful of bread. There was a worthy
      alderman at his right hand, who could no doubt prove to the House that bread spoilt the taste
      of turtle. Was it not, then, a complete delusion to raise such a clamour about bread? He (Mr.
      Greenwood) was really astonished at honourable gentlemen opposite; and he should give their
      measure his most strenuous opposition at every stage.
Mr. Greenwood sat down amidst loud cheers from the Tory party; and Sir Robert Peel turned
      round and gave him a patronising nod of most gracious approval. Indeed his speech must have
      created a very powerful sensation, for upwards of fifty members
       who had been previously stretched upon the benches in the galleries, comfortably
      snoozing, rose up in the middle of their nap to listen to him.
The Conservative papers next morning spoke in raptures of the brilliancy of the new talent
      which had thus suddenly developed itself in the political heaven; while the Liberal prints
      denounced Greenwood's language as the most insane farrago of anti-popular trash ever heard
      during the present century.
Mr. Greenwood cared nothing for these attacks. He had gained his aims: he had already taken
      a stand amongst the party with whom he had determined to act;—he had won the smiles of the
      leader of that party; and he chuckled within himself as he saw baronetcies and sinecures in
      the perspective.
That night he could not sleep. His ideas were reflected back to the time when, poor,
      obscure, and friendless, he had commenced his extraordinary career in the City of London. A
      very few years had passed;—he was now rich, and in a fair way to become influential and
      renowned. The torch of Fortune seemed ever to light him on his way, and never to shine
      obscurely for him in the momentous affairs of life:—like the fabled light of the Rosicrucian's
      ever-burning lamp, the halo of that torch appeared constantly to attend upon his steps.
Whether he thus prospered to the end, the sequel of our tale must show.
