
CHAPTER CCXXXVII.   THE JUGGLERS.
Nearly five weeks had elapsed since the day when the noble-minded Eliza Sydney first took up
      her quarters at Ravensworth Hall.

Time was, therefore, now verging towards the close of May, 1841.
It was at about nine o'clock in the morning of a charming day, at this period, that the
      Resurrection Man sauntered leisurely from the servants' offices, at Ravensworth Hall, with the
      air of a person about to indulge in a stroll after eating a good breakfast.
But when he was out of sight of the Hall, he quickened his pace, and proceeded somewhat
      rapidly towards the ruined lodge where he had once before met the Honourable Gilbert
      Vernon.
And it was to meet that very same individual that he now sought the place again.
But as Vernon had not yet arrived, Tidkins, after walking round the dilapidated cottage to
      convince himself that no stranger was near, took a seat upon a pile of bricks, and, producing
      a cigar-case, was speedily wrapped in the enjoyment of a mild havannah and his own delectable
      meditations.
With the nature of those thoughts we shall not trouble the reader: suffice it to say that
      they were all connected with the scheme which he and his master were carrying on at
      Ravensworth Hall, and the last dread act of which was now in immediate contemplation.
Tidkins had just lighted a second cigar, when he descried Vernon at a distance.
He, however, continued to smoke—for he was not the man to stand upon any ceremony with his
      employer, even were that employer a prince.
"Come at last?" said Tidkins, as Vernon entered the ruins. "Been doing the amiable to the
      ladies, I suppose?"
"I have succeeded in that task tolerably well lately," answered Vernon, with difficulty
      concealing an expression of disgust at the odious familiarity of his agent; but he had already
      learnt that crime places the menial upon a footing with the master, and compels the haughty
      aristocrat to brook the insolence of the vulgar desperado.
"Well, now we are drawing to the end of the play at last," continued Tidkins. "So much the
      better: for I was getting infernally sick of this moping kind of life. But what if this plan
      of ours should happen to fail?"
"Then I will try another—and even another, if necessary, until we succeed," answered Vernon,
      emphatically. "Yes: I am now so bent upon the deed—so resolved to become the lord and owner of
      these broad lands and yon proud mansion—that I will even risk my neck to attain that end."
"You speak in a plucky manner that I admire," said Tidkins. "Besides, when once you are Lord
      Ravensworth, who will dare to utter a suspicion—even if there should seem any ground for
      it?"
"No one—certainly," replied Vernon. "But have you looked about the ruins? Remember the last
      time we met here—there was an eaves-dropper then——"
"Don't alarm yourself," interrupted Tidkins: "I walked carefully round the place; and I'll
      swear no one is near. Unless, indeed," he added, with a jocular chuckle, "some very curious
      person has got into that great cistern up there; and I must confess I didn't climb up to look
      into it."
"Cease this humour," said Vernon, somewhat sternly. "If you have been round the ruins, that
      is sufficient. Our business is too important to allow us to waste time in idle bantering. Do
      the jugglers understand that they are to come up this evening?"
"Fully so," answered Tidkins, coolly inhaling the fragrant vapour of his cigar. "They are
      all at the Three Kings—that public-house which you see by the road-side yonder,—and
      most likely making merry with the couple of guineas that I gave them last night. It is not
      necessary that I should see them again before they come to the Hall."
"You mentioned to them that there was a sick lady at the mansion who would be amused with
      their sports?" said Vernon.
"I have already told you what representations I made," replied Tidkins, impatiently.
      "Where's the use of asking the question over again?"
"For the same reason that one reads a letter twice," rejoined Vernon,—"to see that nothing
      has been omitted which ought to be said or done. But are you sure that the fellows will
      understand how to use the detonating balls?"
"Nothing is easier," answered Tidkins. "And as it was merely to try one that we agreed to
      meet here now, suppose I just make the trial directly?"
"Yes—I am anxious to be assured of the effect," said Vernon. "We are far enough away from
      the Hall to do so in safety."
"Certainly we are," remarked Tidkins. "In the first place we're down in this deep valley;—in
      the second place there's the thick grove on the top of the hill;—and in the third place, even
      if there wasn't the hill at all between us and the Hall, the back windows of the mansion don't
      look this way. So the smoke can't be seen."
"True!" exclaimed Vernon. "And now for the test."
The Resurrection Man drew from his pocket a ball covered with coarse blue paper, and nearly
      as large as a cricket-ball.
Then, rising from his seat, he dashed it with some degree of violence upon the hard
      ground.
It exploded in the twinkling of an eye, with a din as loud as that of a blunderbuss; and
      both Vernon and the Resurrection Man were immediately enveloped in a dense cloud of black and
      sulphurous-smelling smoke.
When the dark volume had blown away, Vernon beheld the cadaverous countenance of the
      Resurrection Man looking towards him with a grin of ferocious satisfaction.
"Well—will that do?" cried Tidkins, triumphantly.
"Admirably," answered Gilbert, averting his face—for there was something fiend-like and
      horrible in the leer of his companion.
There was a short pause; and then those two villains resumed their conversation. But as the
      remainder of their discourse was connected with the last act of their tragic drama, which we
      shall be compelled to relate in detail, it is unnecessary to record in this place any more of
      what passed between them upon the present occasion.
After having been nearly an hour together, Gilbert Vernon and the Resurrection Man
      separated, in order to return by different routes to the Hall.
Five minutes after they had left the building, the head of a man looked cautiously over the
      brink of the empty cistern to which Tidkins had jocularly alluded, and which stood on the top
      of the least dilapidated portion of the lodge.
Seeing that the coast was now perfectly clear, the
      person who was concealed in the cistern emerged from his hiding-place and let
      himself drop lightly upon the ground.

This individual was the gipsy, Morcar.
Being on his way to London,—alone, and upon some business connected with his tribe,—he had
      stopped to rest himself in those ruins: but he had not been there many minutes, when he heard
      the sound of footsteps; and, almost immediately afterwards, he beheld, through a cranny in the
      wall behind which he was seated, the well-known form and features of the Resurrection Man.
His first impulse was to dart upon the miscreant and endeavour to make him his prisoner;
      but, seeing that Tidkins looked suspiciously about, Morcar instantly imagined that he had some
      object in seeking that place. At the same time it struck him, from his knowledge of the
      Resurrection Man's character, that this object could be no good one; and he resolved to watch
      the villain's proceedings.
Thus, while Tidkins was making the circuit of the ruins, Morcar clambered noiselessly and
      rapidly up to the cistern, in which he concealed himself.
The consequence was, that the gipsy overheard the entire discourse which shortly afterwards
      ensued between Tidkins and Vernon; and a scheme of such diabolical villany was thus revealed
      to him, that his hair almost stood on end as the details of the fearful plot were gradually
      developed by means of that conversation.
When the Resurrection Man and Gilbert Vernon had taken their departure, and Morcar had
      emerged from his hiding-place, his first impulse was to proceed to Ravensworth Hall and
      communicate every thing he had overheard to the lady of that mansion.
But, ere he took that step, he sate down, with the usual caution which characterises his
      race, to ponder upon the subject.
We have before stated that it is repugnant to the principles of the Zingarees to be
      instrumental in delivering a criminal over to any justice save their own; and Morcar knew that
      if he did adopt such a course, he must necessarily appear as a witness against the two
      villains whose dark designs he had so strangely discovered. This appearance in a court of
      justice would sorely damage him with his tribe, over whom he was to rule at his father's
      death.
It is, however, probable that the excellent effects
      of Richard Markham's example upon the generous-hearted Morcar would have hushed
      those scruples and induced him to do what his good sense told him was his duty towards
      society, had not the sudden reminiscence of a certain portion of the conversation he had
      overheard confirmed him in the opinion that he should be acting more prudently to counteract
      the project of the two villains at the moment it was to be put into execution, rather than
      deliver them up to justice ere it was attempted.
"I am now so bent upon the deed," had one of the miscreants said, "so resolved
       to become the owner of these broad lands and yon proud mansion—that I will even risk my neck
       to attain that end!"
The reasoning which these words now engendered in Morcar's mind, was coincidentally similar
      to that upon which Eliza Sydney's conduct had been based.
"This man," thought Morcar, "who dared to utter such sentiments, is the member of a noble
      family—the next heir after an infant child, to the title and lands of Ravensworth. Would the
      word of a wandering gipsy be for a moment credited against his indignant denial of the
      accusation which I should make against him, were he now delivered up to justice? And, were he
      to escape from that accusation, would he not commence anew his dark plots against the life of
      that child who seems to stand in his way? Far better will it be for me to counteract his
      scheme, and then proclaim his guilt when my evidence can be corroborated by the fact
      that he did attempt the deed of which he will stand accused! Yes—it must be so. Then
      will the law for ever remove him from a scene where his detestable machinations would sooner
      or later prove fatal to their innocent object!"
Having devised a mode of proceeding, Morcar quitted the ruins, and bent his way towards the
       Three Kings public-house, which was about a mile distant.
On his arrival at the little rustic inn, the gipsy sauntered into the tap-room, where he
      sate down, and ordered some refreshment.
At one of the tables five men were busily engaged in devouring bread and cheese and washing
      down the same with long draughts of Barclay and Perkins's Treble X. They were thin, but
      well-made and athletic-looking fellows; and were dressed in garments of which fustian and
      corduroy were the principal materials. On the bench near them were several bundles tied up in
      handkerchiefs, through the openings and holes of which the quick eye of the gipsy caught sight
      of certain nankin breeches and flesh-coloured stockings, such as are worn by itinerant
      mountebanks. In a corner of the room stood a large drum, and near it a wicker basket with a
      lid.
Morcar was convinced that these persons were the same to whom Vernon and Tidkins had
      alluded.
His object was now to get into conversation with them; and this was easily effected by one
      of those casual remarks upon the weather which invariably commence a discourse between
      strangers in this country.
"Fine day," said the gipsy, after quenching his thirst with half the contents of a pint of
      porter.
"Very, indeed," replied one of the men. "Have you walked far this morning?"
"Pretty well," returned Morcar. "I'm going to London presently," he added with apparent
      carelessness, "to try and astonish the people a little."
"Ah!" exclaimed another of the jugglers: "and how so? For it must be a clever feller to do
      that with the Londoners. But may be your people have got hold of some new way of telling
      fortunes—for the old one is veared out by this time, I should think."
"You suppose that because I am of the gipsy race I must be connected with women who tell
      fortunes," said Morcar, laughing good-naturedly. "Well, so I have been; but now I'm going to
      begin in a new line. In fact I don't mind telling you what it is—it's no secret; and I'm half
      inclined to believe that it's more or less in your way also," he added, glancing significantly
      towards the drum and the bundles.
"If you could only do some new trick in our line," cried one of the men, eagerly, "you'd
      make your fortune: but it must be a good one, mind."
"I can do a trick that, I flatter myself, no other man in England can perform," said Morcar,
      still speaking in a careless, indifferent kind of way. "But as you tell me that you
       are in the juggling line——"
"Yes—we are; and we ain't ashamed on't," exclaimed two or three of the men together.
"Well—then I'll explain to you what I can do," continued Morcar. "I've made a net that winds
      round an immense long roller, which must be raised upon two upright stakes. When the net is
      drawn out at dusk, or in a darkened room, it shows a thousand different figures—men, animals,
      fish, birds, snakes, and monsters of all kinds."
"Capital!—capital!" exclaimed the jugglers.
"But that isn't all," continued Morcar. "These figures all move
      about—skip—leap—dance—fly—crawl—or seem to swim, according to their nature."
"Come, come—that won't do!" said one of the men, who began to think the gipsy was bantering
      them.
"It's as true as you're there," answered Morcar, seriously; "and it's very easy to do,
      too:—only a little phosphorus and other chemical things, skilfully used in a particular way. I
      reckon upon setting all the young children wild with delight when they see it."
"And if you can really do what you say," observed the man who had last spoken, "you're safe
      to make your ten bob a-day. But, then," he added, with a sly glance towards his companions,
      "the trick won't take so well alone: it ought to come after the usual exhibition of chaps like
      us."
"That's just what I have been thinking myself," cried Morcar. "Only, as I didn't know any
      people in your way——"
"Well, now you know some, at all events," interrupted the spokesman of the party of
      jugglers; "and though I say it what shouldn't perhaps, you won't find a jollier or better set
      of fellers than us in all England. What should you say to making a bargain with us?"
"I have no objection," replied Morcar: "we can but give the thing a trial. But I would
      rather begin in the country, if possible, than in London."
"The very ticket!" cried the man: "you shall begin to-night. We're hired to perform at that
      great house which you see from the window; and as we are to be there about half an hour before
      sunset, it will just be dark enough at the end of our performances for you to show yours. What
      do you say?"

"Let us settle the terms," answered Morcar; "and I've no objection."
The five jugglers, who were evidently much delighted at the prospect of securing so valuable
      an addition to their troop, consulted together in whispers for a short period, while Morcar
      hummed a tune as if perfectly indifferent whether a bargain were concluded or not. The men did
      not fail to remark his free and off-hand manner, and took it as an unquestionable proof of his
      confidence in the value of his invention and the success which must attend upon its
      exhibition. They therefore resolved to enlist him on almost any terms.
"Well," said the spokesman of the party, at length turning towards Morcar once more, "me and
      my partners here have no objection to give you one-third of the earnings."
"That will suit my purpose uncommonly," replied Morcar: "so let us shake hands upon it."
"And wet it," added one of the jugglers, who, as the gipsy subsequently discovered, was the
      musician of the party—his instrumental harmony being composed of the huge drum and a set of
      Pandean pipes, vulgarly called a mouth-organ.
The process of shaking hands all round and of imbibing more strong beer was then gone
      through; after which the jugglers became very anxious to see the marvellous net that was to
      make their fortunes. They were, therefore, somewhat disappointed when Morcar informed them
      that one of the tribe had conveyed it to London in his cart the day before; but their
      elongating countenances expanded once more into smiles of satisfaction when he assured them
      that he would instantly set off after it, and be with them again at least an hour previously
      to the time when they intended to visit the mansion in the neighbourhood.
Matters being thus arranged, Morcar took his departure—rejoiced at the success of his
      project, though somewhat annoyed at having been compelled to utter so many falsehoods to the
      credulous jugglers. But this vexation was speedily dissipated by the remembrance of the
      important duty which he had undertaken; and he moreover intended to make the poor fellows a
      handsome recompense for the disappointment they were destined to experience relative to the
      wonderful net.
It is not necessary to follow the gipsy's footsteps to the metropolis, and back to the
       Three Kings again: suffice it to say that he made his appearance at the little
      public-house shortly after six o'clock in the evening—much to the joy of the five jugglers,
      who began to imagine that he had been hoaxing them.
But all their suspicions vanished when they beheld the gipsy return, with an iron rod, as
      long as a hop-pole, and round which the magic net was rolled, over his shoulder.
This rod was not much thicker than the thumb, but the bulk of the burden was considerably
      increased by the folds of the net.
And at that net did the jugglers stare with such eager eyes, that Morcar could hardly
      contain his laughter: for the net was nothing more than a common one of the very largest size,
      such as poachers use to drag canals and small rivers. It was, however, very strong, and when
      stretched out would cover a room eighteen feet long, by twelve in width.
The iron rod was about thirteen feet long, and the net was rolled round it breadthways.
"You will let us have a sight of the thing before we go?" said one of the jugglers.
"I had rather rest myself for half an hour, or so if you please," returned Morcar. "My walk
      to-day has been none of the shortest; and I am sadly fatigued. Your curiosity will keep till
      by and by; for as I have fulfilled my word in coming back, you surely can trust me when I tell
      you that this net, simple as it may appear, will do all I have promised. Besides, we should
      only have the trouble of darkening the room, which must be done with blankets, as there are no
      shutters."
"Let our new friend have his own way, Mike," said the musician of the troop.
"And now," continued Morcar, "I must propose a certain condition, without giving any
      explanation, but it belongs to my part of the performance. What I require is this:—one of you
      must remain entirely with me from the moment I pitch the stakes to which this net is to be
      fastened; and the one who so remains with me, must do just as I direct him in the arrangement
      of the net; because I must seize a particular time of the evening, in regard to the twilight,
      to unroll it."
"Well—that can be managed without difficulty," said the man who had been addressed as Mike.
      "It is always my business to collect the coppers after the exhibition; and I take no share in
      the performances. So I can remain with you—and whatever you tell me to do, shall be done."
"So far, so good," exclaimed Morcar. "And now, as it is pretty nearly time to set off, we
      had better begin to dress."
"Are you going to dress too?" demanded Mike, with mingled satisfaction and
      astonishment.
"Only just to disguise myself a bit," answered Morcar, taking a huge red wig from one pocket
      and a hideous mask from another; "because there's often a prejudice amongst people—especially
      young ones—against gipsies."
"So there is," observed Mike. "Besides, it's much better to go in character, as they
      say."
The jugglers were now in high spirits; and they speedily addressed themselves to the process
      of changing their common apparel for the professional costume.
