
YACHT "SAUTERELLE"
Yacht Sauterelle,

17th August.

Yacht "Sauterelle"

Dearest Mamma,—I am writing as we float down the Seine, it is too enchanting. We are a party
     of ten. The Comte and Comtesse de Tournelle; her mother, the Baronne de Larnac, and her uncle,
     the Baron de Frémond, Jean, Héloise, and me; the Marquise de Vermondoise, and two young men,
     officers in the Cavalry, stationed at Versailles. One is the Vicomte Gaston de la Trémors, and
     the other's name is so long that I can't get it, so you must know him by "Antoine"—he is some
     sort of a relation of Héloise's. The Baronne is a delightful person, the remains of extreme
     good looks and distinction. She was a beauty under the Empire, and her feet are so small, she
     is just as soignée as if she was young, and so vain and human. She lives with her
     daughter while they are in the country—it seems the custom here, these huge family parties
     living together all the summer.

A Visit of Ceremony

The young people have their appartement in the Champs Elysées in Paris, and the old
     ones go to the family hotel in the Faubourg St. Germain. We did say a lot of
     polite things when we went to pay our visit yesterday, and although they know one another so
     well—as it was a "visit of ceremony" to introduce me—we all had our best clothes on, and sat in
     the large salon—(there are four Louis XVI. arm chairs, sticking out each side of the
     fireplaces, in all the salons here). Héloise and the Comtesse de Tournelle are great friends.
     The Comte de Tournelle is charming, he is like the people in the last century Memoirs, he ought
     to have powdered hair, and his manners have a distinction and a wit quite unlike anything in
     England. One can see he is descended from people who had their heads cut off for being
     aristocrats. Jean says he does not belong to le Sporting, and is fearfully effeminate.
     He can't even put on his own socks without his valet, and he never rides or bicycles or
     anything, but just does a little motor-carring, and fights a few duels.
The Comtesse de Tournelle is small and young and rather dull; she reads a great deal. The old
     boy, the Baron de Frémond (he owns the Sauterelle) is a jolly old soul, and chaffs his
     sister and niece, and every one, all the time, and thinks it so funny to talk fearful English.
     The two young men haven't looked at me much. They are in uniform! and they put their heels
     together and bowed deeply when they were introduced, but we haven't spoken yet. The Marquise de
     Vermondoise is perfectly lovely, so fascinating, with such a queer deep voice, and one tooth at
     the side of the front missing; and her tongue keeps getting in there when she speaks, which
     gives her a kind of lisp, and it is awfully attractive. I think de Tournelle would like to kiss
     her, by the way he looked at her when she thanked him for handing her on board.

The Invaluable Hippolyte

It is a steam yacht with a wee cabin, and a deck above that, with seats looking out each
     side, like old omnibuses, and in the stern (if that means the back part) are the sailors and
     the engines, and the oddest arrangement of cooking apparatus. You should just taste the
     exquisite breakfasts that Hippolyte (the Baronne de Larnac's maître d'hôtel) cooked
     for us this morning after we started. He is the queerest creature, with a face like a baboon,
     and side whiskers, and the rest a deep blue from shaving. The Baronne says she could not live
     without him; he is a splendid cook, and a perfect femme de chambre, and ready for
     anything. He is much more familiar than we should ever let a servant be in England. It was
     rough all the morning, quite waves. The Seine is only half a mile from the Château de
     Croixmare, and runs past the Tournelles' garden, so they have a private landing stage, and we
     all embarked from there. Jean and the Comte are dressed in beautiful English blue serges, and
     look neat enough to be under a glass case. The old Baron does not care what he wears, and this
     morning while he was working with the sailors had on a black Sunday coat!
The Baronne kept screaming when the boat rocked a little. "Nous ferons naufrage! Mon Dieu!
     Mon Dieu!" and the Vicomte tried to comfort her, but she did not stop till Hippolyte popped his
     head out of the cabin and said, "Pas de danger! et il ne faut pas que Mme. la Baronne fasse la
     Bebête!"
At déjeûner we had only one plate each, and one knife and fork. It was so windy we
     could not have it under the awning in the bows, and the cabin is so narrow that the seats are
     against the wall, and the table in the middle. No one can pass to wait, so between the courses
     we washed our plates in the Seine, out of the window. It was gay! They are all so
     witty, but it is not considered correct to talk just to one's neighbour, a conversation à
      deux. Everything must be general, so it is a continual sharpening of wits, and one has to
     shout a good deal, as otherwise, with every one talking at once, one would not be heard. I know
     French pretty well as you know, but they say a lot of strange things I can't understand, and
     whenever I answer or ask why, they go into fits of laughter and say, "Est elle gentille
     l'enfant! hein!"
We are going to stop at the next small village to post the letters, so good-bye, dear
     Mamma.—Your affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.

P.S.—I hope you won't get muddled, Mamma, with all their names, it takes so long
     writing the whole thing, so please remember Mme. de Larnac is the "Baronne," Monsieur de
     Frémond is the "Baron," Monsieur de Tournelle is the "Comte," Mme. de Tournelle is the
     "Comtesse," Mme. de Vermondoise is the "Marquise," Monsieur de la Trémors is the "Vicomte," and
     "Antoine" is the other officer. So if I haven't always time to put their names you will know
     now which they are.
Vernon, Yacht Sauterelle,

Thursday morning.

Vernon

Dearest Mamma,—The scenery we came through yesterday is quite beautiful, but I did not pay so
     much attention to it as I might have done, because Jean and the Comte would talk to me. You
     would be amused at Vernon, where we stayed the night in such an inn! I believe it is
     the only one in the place, and as old as the hills. You get at the bedrooms from an open
     gallery that runs round the courtyard, and that smells of garlic and stables. We got here about
     six, and started en masse to inspect the rooms. Hippolyte had engaged them beforehand,
     and seemed rather apologetic about them, and finally, when there did not appear half enough to
     go round, he shrugged his shoulders almost up to his ears and said, "Que voulez vous!" and that
     "Ces Messieurs" would have to be "très bourgeois en voyage," and that there was nothing for it
     but that Mme. la Comtesse de Tournelle should "partager l'appartement de Monsieur le Comte de
     Tournelle," and that Monsieur le Comte de Croixmare would have to extend like hospitality to
     Mme. la Comtesse de Croixmare. This caused shrieks of derision. Héloise said she would prefer
     to sleep on the dining-room table, and "Antoine" said he thought people ought to be a little
     more careful of their reputations even en voyage. Finally they unearthed a baby's cot
     in the room that Hippolyte had designed for the Croixmare menage, and de Tournelle said it was
     the very thing for me, but Jean replied, "Mon cher ami c'est une Bébé beaucoup trop
     emoustillante," which I thought very rude, just as if I snored, or something dreadful like
     that. Then, after a further prowl, a fearful little hole was discovered beyond, with no
     curtains to the windows, or blinds, or shutters, just a scrap of net. The face of Agnès when
     she saw it!

A Necessary Precaution

Dinner was not until seven, so Jean and I went out for a walk; as Hippolyte advised us to try
     and find a chemist and buy some flea powder. "Je trouverai ça plus prudent," he said. Jean is
     getting quite natural with me now, and isn't so awfully polite. The chemist took us for a
     honeymoon couple (as, of course, if I had been French I could not have gone for a walk with
     Jean alone). He—the chemist—was so sympathetic, he had only one packet of powder left, he said,
     as so much was required by the voyageurs and inhabitants that he was out of it (that
     did not sound a pleasant prospect for our night)—"Mais, madame" (that's me), "n'est pas assez
     grasse pour les attirer," he added by way of consolation.
It was spitting with rain when we got back, and they all made such a fuss for fear I had got
     wet, and they would not for worlds stir out of doors to see the church or anything, which I
     heard is very picturesque. We had such an amusing dinner, the food was wonderful, considering
     the place, but a horrible cloth and pewter forks and spoons. There were two
      officiers at another table (only infantry), and they were so interested in
     our party.

Close Quarters

"Antoine" sat next to me, and in a pause in the general conversation he said to me (it is the
     first time he has addressed me directly), "Il fait mauvais temps, mademoiselle." I have heard
     him saying all kinds of drôle things to the others, so it shows he can be quite
     intelligent. It is just because I am not married I suppose, so I said that is what English
     people always spoke about—the weather—and I wanted to hear something different in France. He
     seemed perfectly shocked, and hardly spoke to me after that, but the Vicomte, who was
     listening, began at once to say flattering things across the table. They all make compliments
     upon my French, and are very gay and kind, but I wish they did not eat so badly. The Comte and
     the Marquise, who are cousins, and of the very oldest noblesse, are the worst—one daren't look
     sometimes. The Comtesse is a little better, but then her family is only Empire, and Jean and
     Héloise are fairly decent.
I could bear most of it, if it wasn't for the peppermint glasses at the end, which the men
     have. The whole party are very French, not a bit like the people we see at Cannes, who have
     been much with the English. It is a different thing altogether. When dinner was over the rain
     stopped, and after a lot of talk—as to whether the ground would be too damp or not—we at last
     ventured for a walk down to the bridge and back. Then we returned and commenced a general
     powdering of the beds, beginning with the de Tournelles' apartment; next we went to the
     Marquise's—she had such an exquisite nightgown laid out, it was made of pink chiffon. When we
     got to my room they made all kinds of sympathies for me having such a small and stuffy place.
     The powder was all gone before we could sprinkle the Baronne's bed. Agnès was not quite so
     uppish undressing me as usual. Perhaps she realised this part of her France was not so good as
     England.
Next morning when I got down—we had arranged to have our premier déjeûner all
     together, not in our rooms, as we were to make such an early start—"Antoine" and Héloise were
     already there. The Vicomte and the Baronne came in soon after; he at once began: "Comme Mlle.
     est ravissante le soir! un petit ange à son déshabillé! Une si éblouissante chevelure!"

A Conjugal Experiment

The wretch had been watching me from the opposite gallery, wasn't it odious of him,
     Mamma? No Englishman would have done such a thing. I was angry, but Héloise said it
     was no use, that I must get accustomed to "les habitudes de voyage," and that she did not
     suppose he had really looked, it was only to tease me. But I believe he had—anyway
     from that moment de la Trémors has been always talking to me. Presently while we were eating
     our rolls, the garçon, a Parisian (who was also the ostler), came in and said: Would
     Madame—indicating the Baronne—come up to "Mademoiselle," who wished to speak to her? We could
     not think who he could mean, as I was the only "Mademoiselle" of the party. The Baronne told
     him so. "Mais non!" he said, jerking his thumb in the direction of upstairs, "La demoiselle
     dans la chambre de Monsieur."
"Mais que dites vous mon brave homme!" screamed the Baronne and Héloise together. The man was
     quite annoyed.
"Je dis ce que je dis et je m'en fiche pas mal! la petite demoiselle blonde, dans la chambre
     de Monsieur le Comte de Tournelle."
At that moment the Comtesse came in, so with another jerk of his thumb at her, "Comment! vous
     ne me croyez pas?" he said, "tiens—la voilà!" and he bounced out of the room.
"Antoine" said it served them perfectly right, that he had warned them their reputations
     would suffer if husbands and wives camped together. Even a place like Vernon, he said, was
     sufficiently enlightened to find the situation impossible.
I don't know what it all meant, but the Comtesse de Tournelle is now called "la
     demoiselle!"
The two young men leave us for the day, to do their duty at Versailles, but are to meet us
     again at Rouen in the evening, with leave for a few days. We are just going on board, so I will
     finish this presently.

5 p.m.—The scenery is too beautiful after you pass Vernon, and it was so interesting
     getting in and out of the locks. The Baronne and I and Jean talked together on the raised deck,
     while de Tournelle read to the Marquise in the bows. The old Baron is mostly with the sailors,
     and Héloise slept a good deal. Every now and then Hippolyte came out from his cooking place,
     and one saw his baboon face appearing on a level with the deck floor, and he would explain all
     the places we passed, and it always ended with: "Il ne faut pas que Mme. La Baronne pionce
     c'est très très intéressant."
I can't tell you what a drôle creature he is. Héloise woke up presently and talked
     to me; she said if it was not for the Tournelles she could not stand the Château de Croixmare
     and Victorine. It appears too, that when in Paris, Godmamma always drives in the Bois at the
     wrong times, and will have her opera box on the nights no one is there, and that irritates
     Héloise.
I can't think why papa and she were such friends. I don't believe if he had been alive now,
     and accustomed to really nice people like you and me, he would have been able to put up with
     her.
I shall post this directly we land, I am writing on the cabin table, and now good-bye.—Your
     affectionate daughter, Elizabeth.
