<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Harry Heathcote of Gangoil by Anthony Trollope</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER IX. — THE BUSH FIGHT.
Harry Heathcote had on this occasion entertained no doubt whatever that the fire had been
     intentional and premeditated. A lighted torch must have been dragged along the grass, so as to
     ignite a line many yards long all at the same time. He had been luckily near enough to the spot
     to see almost the commencement of the burning, and was therefore aware of its form and
     circumstances. He almost wondered that he had not seen the figure of the man who had drawn the
     torch, or at any rate heard his steps. Pursuit would have been out of the question, as his work
     was wanted at the moment to extinguish the flames. The miscreant probably had remembered this,
     and had known that he might escape stealthily without the noise of a rapid retreat.
When the work was over, when he had put out the fire he had himself lighted, and had
     exterminated the lingering remnants of that which had been intended to destroy him, he stood
     still a while almost in despair. His condition seemed to be hopeless. What could he do against
     such a band of enemies, knowing as he did that, had he been backed even by a score of trusty
     followers, one foe might still suffice to ruin him? At the present moment he was very hot with
     the work he had done, as were also Jacko and the German. O’Dowd had also come up as they were
     completing their work. Their mode of extinguishing the flames had been to beat them down with
     branches of gum-tree loaded with leaves. By sweeping these along the burning ground the low
     flames would be scattered and expelled. But the work was very hard and hot. The boughs they
     used were heavy, and the air around them, sultry enough from its own properties, was made
     almost unbearable by the added heat of the fires.
The work had been so far done, but it might be begun again at any moment, either near or at a
     distance. No doubt the attempt would be made elsewhere along the boundary between Gangoil and
     Boolabong—was very probably being made at this moment. The two men whom he could trust and
     Jacko were now with him. They were wiping their brows with their arms and panting with their
     work.
He first resolved on sending Mickey O’Dowd to the house. The distance was great, and the
     man’s assistance might be essential. But he could not bear to leave his wife without news from
     him. Then, after considering a while, he made up his mind to go back toward his own fence,
     making his way as he went southerly down toward the river. They who were determined to injure
     him would, he thought, repeat their attempt in that direction. He hardly said a word to his two
     followers, but rode at a foot-pace to the spot at his fence which he had selected as the site
     of his bivouac for the night.
“It won’t be very cheery, Bender,” he said to the German; “but we shall have to make a night
     of it till they disturb us again.”
The German made a motion with his arms intended to signify his utter indifference. One place
     was the same as another to him. Jacko uttered his usual ejaculation, and then, having hitched
     his horse to the fence, threw himself on his back upon the grass.
No doubt they all slept, but they slept as watchers sleep, with one eye open. It was Harry
     who first saw the light which a few minutes later made itself visible to the ladies at the home
     station. “Karl,” he exclaimed, jumping up, “they’re at it again—look there.”
In less than half a minute, and without speaking another word, they were all on their horses
     and riding in the direction of the light. It came from a part of the Boolabong run somewhat
     nearer to the river than the place at which they had stationed themselves, where the strip of
     ground between Harry’s fence and the acknowledged boundary of Brownbie’s run was the narrowest.
     As they approached the fire, they became aware that it had been lighted on Boolabong. On this
     occasion Harry did not ride on up to the flames, knowing that the use or loss of a few minutes
     might save or destroy his property. He hardly spoke a word as he proceeded on his business,
     feeling that they upon whom he had to depend were sufficiently instructed, if only they would
     be sufficiently energetic.
“Keep it well under, but let it run,” was all he said, as, lighting a dried bush with a
     match, he ran the fire along the ground in front of the coming flames.
A stranger seeing it all would have felt sure that the remedy would have been as bad as the
     disease, for the fire which Harry himself made every now and again seemed to get the better of
     those who were endeavoring to control it. There might perhaps be a quarter of a mile between
     the front of the advancing fire and the line at which Harry had commenced to destroy the food
     which would have fed the coming flames. He himself, as quickly as he lighted the grass, which
     in itself was the work but of a moment, would strain himself to the utmost at the much harder
     task of controlling his own fire, so that it should not run away from him, and get, as it were,
     out of his hands, and be as bad to him as that which he was thus seeking to circumvent. The
     German and Jacko worked like heroes, probably with intense enjoyment of the excitement, and,
     after a while, found a fourth figure among the flames, for Mickey had now returned.
“You saw them,” Harry said, panting with his work.
“They’s all right,” said Mickey, flopping away with a great bough; “but that tarnation
     Chinese has gone off.”
“My word! Sing Sing. Find him at Boolabong,” said Jacko.
The German, whose gum-tree bough was a very big one, and whose every thought was intent on
     letting the fire run while he still held it in hand, had not breath for a syllable.
But the back fire was extending itself, so as to get round them. Every now and then Harry
     extended his own line, moving always forward toward Gangoil as he did so, though he and his men
     were always on Brownbie’s territory. He had no doubt but that where he could succeed in
     destroying the grass for a breadth of forty or fifty yards he would starve out the inimical
     flames. The trees and bushes without the herbage would not enable it to travel a yard. Wherever
     the grass was burned down black to the soil, the fire would stop. But should they, who were at
     work, once allow themselves to be outflanked, their exertions would be all in vain. And then
     those wretches might light a dozen fires. The work was so hard, so hot, and often so hopeless,
     that the unhappy young squatter was more than once tempted to bid his men desist and to return
     to his homestead. The flames would not follow him there. He could, at any rate, make that safe.
     And then, when he had repudiated this feeling as unworthy of him, he began to consider within
     himself whether he would not do better for his property by taking his men with him on to his
     run, and endeavoring to drive his sheep out of danger. But as he thought of all this, he still
     worked, still fired the grass, and still controlled the flames. Presently he became aware of
     what seemed to him at first to be a third fire. Through the trees, in the direction of the
     river, he could see the glimmering of low flames and the figures of men. But it was soon
     apparent to him that these men were working in his cause, and that they, too, were burning the
     grass that would have fed the advancing flames. At first he could not spare the minute which
     would be necessary to find out who was his friend, but, as they drew nearer, he knew the man.
     It was the sugar planter from the mill and with him his foreman.
“We’ve been doing our best,” said Medlicot, “but we’ve been terribly afraid that the fire
     would slip away from us.”
“It’s the only thing,” said Harry, too much excited at the moment to ask questions as to the
     cause of Medlicot’s presence so far from his home at that time of the evening. “It’s getting
     round us, I’m afraid, all the same.”
“I don’t know but it is. It’s almost impossible to distinguish. How hot the fire makes
     it!”
“Hot, indeed!” said Harry. “It’s killing work for men, and then all for no good! To think
     that men, creatures that call themselves men, should do such a thing as this! It breaks one’s
     heart.” He had paused as he spoke, leaning on the great battered bough which he held, but in an
     instant was at work with it again. “Do you stay here, Mr. Medlicot, with the men, and I’ll go
     on beyond where you began. If I find the fire growing down, I’ll shout, and they can come to
     me.” So saying, he rushed on with a lighted bush torch in his band.
Suddenly he found himself confronted in the bush by a man on horseback, whom he at once
     recognized as Georgie Brownbie. He forgot for a moment where he was and began to question the
     reprobate as to his presence at that spot.
“That’s like your impudence,” said Georgie. “You’re not only trespassing, but you’re
     destroying our property willfully, and you ask me what business I have here. You’re a nice sort
     of young man.”
Harry, checked for a moment by the remembrance that he was in truth upon Boolabong run, did
     not at once answer.
“Put that bush down, and don’t burn our grass,” continued Georgie, “or you shall have to
     answer for it. What right have you to fire our grass?”
“Who fired it first?”
“It lighted itself. That’s no rule why you should light it more. You give over, or I punch
     your head for you.”
Harry’s men and Medlicot were advancing toward him, trampling out their own embers as they
     came; and Georgie Brownbie, who was alone, when he saw that there were four or five men against
     him, turned round and rode back.
“Did you ever see impudence like that?” said Harry. “He’s probably the very man who set the
     match, and yet he comes and brazens it out with me.”
“I don’t think he’s the man who set the match,” said Medlicot, quietly; “at any rate there
     was another.”
“Who was it?”
“My man, Nokes. I saw him with the torch in his hand.”
“Heaven and earth!”
“Yes, Mr. Heathcote. I saw him put it down. You were about right, you see, and I was about
     wrong.”
Harry had not a word to say, unless it were tell the man that he loved him for the frankness
     of his confession. But the moment was hardly auspicious for such a declaration. There was no
     excuse for them to pause in their work, for the fire was still crackling at their back, and
     they did no more than pause.
“Ah!” said Harry, “there it goes; we shall be done at last.” For he saw that he was being
     outflanked by the advancing flames. But still they worked, drawing lines of fire here and
     there, and still they hoped that there might be ground for hope. Nokes had been seen; but,
     pregnant as the theme might be with words, it was almost impossible to talk. Questions could
     not be asked and answered without stopping in their toil. There were questions which Harry
     longed to ask. Could Medlicot swear to the man? Did the man know that he had been seen? If he
     knew that he had been watched while he lit the grass, he would soon be far away from Medlicot’s
     Mill and Gangoil. Harry felt that it would be a consolation to him in his trouble if he could
     get hold of this man, and keep him, and prosecute him—and have him hung. Even in the tumult of
     the moment he was able to reflect about it, and to think that he remembered that the crime of
     arson was capital in the colony of Queensland. He had endeavored to be good to the men with
     whom he had dealings. He had not stinted their food, or cut them short in their wages, or been
     hard in exacting work from them. And this was his return! Ideas as to the excellence of
     absolute dominion and power flitted across his brain—such power as Abraham, no doubt,
     exercised. In Abraham’s time the people were submissive, and the world was happy. Harry
     Heathcote, at least, had never heard that it was not happy. But as he thought of all this he
     worked away with his bush and his matches, extinguishing the flames here and lighting them
     there, striving to make a cordon of black bare ground between Boolabong and Gangoil. Surely
     Abraham had never been called on to work like this!
He and his men were in a line covering something above a quarter of a mile of ground, of
     which line he was himself the nearest to the river, and Medlicot and his foreman the farthest
     from it. The German and O’Dowd were in the middle, and Jacko was working with his master. If
     Harry had just cause for anger and sorrow in regard to Nokes and Boscobel, he certainly had
     equal cause to be proud of the stanchness of his remaining satellites. The men worked with a
     will, as though the whole run had been the personal property of each of them. Nokes and
     Boscobel would probably have done the same had the fires come before they had quarreled with
     their master. It is a small and narrow point that turns the rushing train to the right or to
     the left. The rushing man is often turned off by a point as small and narrow.
“My word!” said Jacko, on a sudden, “here they are, all o’ horseback!” And as he spoke, there
     was the sound of half a dozen horsemen galloping up to them through the bush. “Why, there’s
     Bos, his own self,” said Jacko.
The two leading men were Joe and Jerry Brownbie, who, for this night only, had composed their
     quarrels, and close to them was Boscobel. There were others behind, also mounted—Jack Brownbie
     and Georgie, and Nokes himself; but they, though their figures were seen, could not be
     distinguished in the gloom of the night. Nor, indeed, did Harry at first discern of how many
     the party consisted. It seemed that there was a whole troop of horsemen, whose purpose it was
     to interrupt him in his work, so that the flames should certainly go ahead. And it was evident
     that the men thought that they could do so without subjecting themselves to legal penalties. As
     far as Harry Heathcote could see, they were correct in their view. He could have no right to
     burn the grass on Boolabong. He had no claim even to be there. It was true that he could plead
     that he was stopping the fire which they had purposely made; but they could prove his
     handiwork, whereas it would be almost impossible that he should prove theirs.
The whole forest was not red, but lurid, with the fires, and the air was laden with both the
     smell and the heat of the conflagration. The horsemen were dressed, as was Harry himself, in
     trowsers and shirts, with old slouch hats, and each of them had a cudgel in his hand. As they
     came galloping up through the trees they were as uncanny and unwelcome a set of visitors as any
     man was ever called on to receive. Harry necessarily stayed his work, and stood still to bear
     the brunt of the coming attack; but Jacko went on with his employment faster than ever, as
     though a troop of men in the dark were nothing to him.
Jerry Brownbie was the first to speak. “What’s this you’re up to, Heathcote? Firing our
     grass? It’s arson. You shall swing for this.”
“I’ll take my chance of that,” said Harry, turning to his work again.
“No, I’m blessed if you do. Ride over him, Bos, while I stop these other fellows.”
The Brownbies had been aware that Harry’s two boundary riders were with him, but had not
     heard of the arrival of Medlicot and the other man. Nokes was aware that some one on horseback
     had been near him when he was firing the grass, but had thought that it was one of the party
     from Gangoil. By the time that Jerry Brownbie had reached the German, Medlicot was there
     also.
“Who the deuce are you?” asked Jerry.
“What business is that of yours?” said Medlicot.
“No business of mine, and you firing our grass! I’ll let you know my business pretty
     quickly.”
“It’s that fellow, Medlicot, from the sugar-mill,” said Joe; “the man that Nokes is
     with.”
“I thought you was a horse of another color,” continued Jerry, who had been given to
     understand that Medlicot was Heathcote’s enemy. “Anyway, I won’t have my grass fired. If God
     A’mighty chooses to send fires, we can’t help it. But I’m not going to have incendiaries here
     as well. You’re a new chum, and don’t understand what you’re about, but you must stop
     this.”
As Medlicot still went on putting out the fire, Jerry attempted to ride him down. Medlicot
     caught the horse by the rein, and violently backed the brute in among the embers. The animal
     plunged and reared, getting his head loose, and at last came down, he and his rider together.
     In the mean time Joe Brownbie, seeing this, rode up behind the sugar planter, and struck him
     violently with his cudgel over the shoulder. Medlicot sank nearly to the ground, but at once
     recovered himself. He knew that some bone on the left side of his body was broken; but he could
     still fight with his right hand, and he did fight.
Boscobel and Georgie Brownbie both attempted to ride over Harry together, and might have
     succeeded had not Jacko ingeniously inserted the burning branch of gum-tree with which he had
     been working under the belly of the horse on which Boscobel was riding. The animal jumped
     immediately from the ground, bucking into the air, and Boscobel was thrown far over his head.
     Georgie Brownbie then turned upon Jacko, but Jacko was far too nimble to be caught, and escaped
     among the trees.
For a few minutes the fight was general, but the footmen had the best of it, in spite of the
     injury done to Medlicot. Jerry was bruised and burned about the face by his fall among the
     ashes, and did not much relish the work afterward. Boscobel was stunned for a few moments, and
     was quite ready to retreat when he came to himself. Nokes during the whole time did not show
     himself, alleging as a reason afterward the presence of his employer Medlicot.
“I’m blessed if your cowardice sha’n’t hang you,” said Joe Brownbie to him on their way home.
     “Do you think we’re going to fight the battles of a fellow like you, who hasn’t pluck to come
     forward himself?”
“I’ve as much pluck as you,” answered Nokes, “and am ready to fight you any day. But I know
     when a man is to come forward and when he’s not. Hang me! I’m not so near hanging as some folks
     at Boolabong.” We may imagine, therefore, that the night was not spent pleasantly among the
     Brownbies after these adventures.
There were, of course, very much cursing and swearing, and very many threats, before the
     party from Boolabong did retreat. Their great point was, of coarse, this—that Heathcote was
     willfully firing the grass, and was, therefore, no better than an incendiary. Of course they
     stoutly denied that the original fire had been intentional, and denied as stoutly that the
     original fire could be stopped by fires. But at last they went, leaving Heathcote and his party
     masters of the battle-field. Jerry was taken away in a sad condition; and, in subsequent
     accounts of the transaction given from Boolabong, his fall was put forward as the reason of
     their flight, he having been the general on the occasion. And Boscobel had certainly lost all
     stomach for immediate fighting. Immediately behind the battle-field they come across Nokes, and
     Sing Sing, the runaway cook from Gangoil. The poor Chinaman had made the mistake of joining the
     party which was not successful.
But Harry, though the victory was with him, was hardly in a mood for triumph. He soon found
     that Medlicot’s collar-bone was broken, and it would be necessary, therefore, that he should
     return with the wounded man to the station. And the flames, as he feared, had altogether got
     ahead of him during the fight. As far as they had gone, they had stopped the fire, having made
     a black wilderness a mile and a half in length, which, during the whole distance, ceased
     suddenly at the line at which the subsidiary fire had been extinguished. But while the attack
     was being made upon them the flames had crept on to the southward, and had now got beyond their
     reach. It had seemed, however, that the mass of fire which had got away from them was small,
     and already the damp of the night was on the grass; and Harry felt himself justified in hoping
     not that there might be no loss, but that the loss might not be ruinous.
Medlicot consented to be taken back to Gangoil instead of to the mill. Perhaps he thought
     that Kate Daly might be a better nurse than his mother, or that the quiet of the sheep station
     might be better for him than the clatter of his own mill-wheels. It was midnight, and they had
     a ride of fourteen miles, which was hard enough upon a man with a broken collarbone. The whole
     party also was thoroughly fatigued. The work they had been doing was about as hard as could
     fall to a man’s lot, and they had now been many hours without food. Before they started Mickey
     produced his flask, the contents of which were divided equally among them all, including
     Jacko.
As they were preparing to start home Medlicot explained that it had struck him by degrees
     that Heathcote might be right in regard to Nokes, and that he had determined to watch the man
     himself whenever he should leave the mill. On that Monday he had given up work somewhat earlier
     than usual, saying that, as the following day was Christmas, he should not come to the mill.
     From that time Medlicot and his foreman had watched him.
“Yes,” said he, in answer to a question from Heathcote, “I can swear that I saw him with the
     lighted torch in his hand, and that he placed it among the grass. There were two others from
     Boolabong with him, and they must have seen him too.”
</div></body></text></TEI>