
PART III. 
SUICIDE.
Piccadilly, April. 
Considering the extent to which I have been digressing, it will be perhaps
                    desirable, before I plunge again into the stormy current of my narrative, to
                    define in a few words what, in the language of diplomacy, is termed "the
                    situation." After I have done so, I shall feel much obliged if you will kindly
                    "grasp" it. Briefly, it is as follows: I am telegraphed for in frantic terms by
                    an old lady who is under the firm impression that I am engaged to be married to
                    her daughter. I am violently in love with that daughter, but for certain reasons
                    I have felt it my duty to account for my extraordinary conduct by informing her
                    confidentially that I have occasional fits of temporary insanity. That daughter,
                    I am positively assured by her mother, is no less violently attached to my most
                    dear and intimate friend. My most dear and intimate friend returns the
                    affection. Mamma threatens that if I do not marry her daughter, rather than
                    allow my most dear and intimate friend to do so, she will ally the young lady to
                    an affluent native of Bombay. So much is known. On the following points I am
                    still in the dark:—
First, What on earth does Lady Broadhem mean by telling me to come immediately,
                    as delay may be fatal?—to whom? to me or to Lady Ursula, or herself? My
                    knowledge of her ladyship induces me to incline towards the latter hypothesis;
                    the suspense is, however, none the less trying.
Second, Does Lady Ursula imagine that I know how she and Grandon feel towards
                    each other?
Third, Is Grandon under the impression that I have actually proposed and been
                    accepted by Lady Ursula?
Fourth, Does my conduct occasionally amount to something more than eccentricity
                    or not?
Fifth—and this was very unpleasant—Shall I find Grandon at our joint abode? And
                    if so, what shall I say to him?
Sixth, Have Grandon and Lady Ursula met, and did anything pass between them?
Thank goodness Grandon was at the House. So, after a hurried toilet, I went on to
                    Grosvenor Square. The young ladies were both out. Lady Bridget had taken
                    advantage of the chaperonage of a newly-married rather
                    fast female cousin, to go to a ball. Lady Ursula had gone to a solitary tea with
                    a crabbed old aunt. Lady Broadhem was in her own sitting-room, lying on a couch
                    behind a table covered with papers. She looked wearily up when I entered, and
                    held out a thin hand for me to do what I liked with. "How good of you to come,
                    dear Frank!" she said. It was the first time she had ever called me Frank, and I
                    knew she expected me to acknowledge it by pressing her fingers, so I squeezed
                    them affectionately. "Broadhem said if I wanted to make sure of you I ought to
                    have brought Ursula's name into the telegraph, but I told him her mother's would
                    do as well."
"What does the——" I am afraid I mentally said 'old girl'—"want, I wonder? It must
                    be really serious, or she would have shammed agitation. There is something about
                    this oily calm which is rather portentous. Then she has taken care to have every
                    member of the family out of the house. What is she ringing the bell for
                    now?"
"Tell Lady Ursula when she comes home that I am engaged particularly, and will
                    come up and see her in her bedroom before she goes to bed," said Lady Broadhem
                    to the servant who answered it.
"Does not Lady Ursula know of my having come to town in answer to your summons?"
                    I asked.
"No, dear child; why should I inflict my troubles upon her? Even Broadhem, to
                    whom I was obliged to speak more openly, only suspects the real state of the
                    case. I have reserved my full confidence for my future son-in-law."
I lifted up my eyes with a rapturous expression, and played with a paper-knife.
                    She wanted me to help her on with an obvious remark, which I declined to make;
                    so, after a pause, she went on, with a deep sigh,——
"What sad news we keep on getting of those poor dear Confederates, Frank!"
"Let us hope they will recover," said I, encouragingly.
"Oh, but they do keep on falling so, it is quite dreadful."
"There was no great number of them fell at Wilmington."
"How stupid I am!" she said; "my poor mind gets quite bewildered. I was thinking
                    of stock, not men; they went down again three more yesterday, and my broker
                    declines altogether to carry them on from one account to another any more. I
                    bought at 60, and they have done nothing but go down ever since. I generally go
                    by Lord Staggerton's advice, and he recommended me to sell a bear some months
                    ago; but that stupid little Spiffy Goldtip insisted that it was only a temporary
                    depression, and now he says how could he know that President Davis would replace
                    Johnston by Hood."
"Very tiresome of Davis: but you should have employed more than one broker," I
                    remarked. "Persons of limited capital and speculative tendencies should operate
                    mysteriously. Your right hand should not know what your left hand is doing."
"Hush, Frank! you can surely be business-like without being profane. I was
                    completely in Spiffy's hands; Lady Mundane told me she always let him do for
                    her, and"—here Lady Broadhem lowered her voice—"I know he
                    has access to the best sources of information. I used to employ Staggerton, but
                    he is so selfish that he never told me the best things; besides which, of
                    course, I was obliged to have him constantly to dinner; and his great delight
                    was always to say things which were calculated to shock my religious friends.
                    Moreover, he has lately been doing more as a promoter of new companies than in
                    buying and selling. Now Spiffy is so very useful in society, and has so much
                    tact, that although there are all kinds of stories against him, still I did not
                    think there was any sufficient reason to shut him out of the house. There was
                    quite a set made against the poor little man at one time—worldly people are so
                    hard and uncharitable; so, partly for the sake of his aunt, Lady Spiffington,
                    who was my dear friend, and partly, indeed, because Staggerton had really become
                    useless and intolerable, I put my affairs entirely into Spiffy's hands."
"And the result is?" I asked.
"That I must pay up —27,000 to-morrow," said Lady Broadhem, with the impenitent
                    sigh of a hardened criminal.
"You should have kept his lordship to act as a check on the Honourable
                    Spiffington," I said; "but I cannot advise now, unless I know everything."
A faint tinge suffused Lady Broadhem's cheek as she said, "What more do you want
                    to know?"
"Exactly what money you possess, and exactly how it is invested."
"I don't see that that is at all necessary. Here is Spiffington's letter, from
                    which you will see how much I must pay to-morrow; my assurance that I cannot
                    produce so large a sum at such short notice is enough."
"You can surely have no difficulty in finding some one who would lend you the
                    money, provided you were to pay a sufficiently high rate of interest."
The tinge which had not left Lady Broadhem's cheek deepened as she answered me,
                    "Frank, it was on no hasty impulse that I telegraphed for you. I do not feel
                    bound to enter into all the details of my private affairs, but I do feel that if
                    there is one man in the world upon whom, at such a crisis, I have a right to
                    rely, it is he to whom I have promised my daughter, and who professes to be
                    devotedly attached to her."
"In short, Lady Broadhem," said I, rising and taking up my hat, "you are willing
                    to part with your daughter to me on condition of my paying a first instalment of
                    —27,000 down, with the prospect of 'calls' to an unlimited extent looming in the
                    background. I doubt whether you will find Chundango prepared to go into such a
                    very hazardous speculation, but I should recommend you to apply to him."
At that moment I heard Lady Ursula's voice in the hall, and the rustle of her
                    dress as she went up-stairs. I was on my way to the door, but I stopped
                    abruptly, and turned upon Lady Broadhem. She was saying something to which I was
                    not attending, but now was suddenly paralysed and silenced as I looked at her
                    fixedly. If a glance can convey meaning, I flatter myself my eyes were not
                    devoid of expression at that moment. "What!" I thought, "is it reserved for the
                    mother of the girl I love to make me call her 'a hazardous speculation'?" It is
                    impossible for me to describe the intensity of the hatred which I felt at this
                    moment for the woman who had caused me for one second to think of Ursula as a
                    marketable commodity, who should be offered for purchase to an Oriental
                    adventurer. The only being I despised more than Lady Broadhem was
                    myself;—because she chose to take my angel off the pedestal on which I had
                    placed her and throw her into the dirt, was I calmly to acquiesce in the
                    proceeding? The storm raging within me seemed gradually to blind me to external
                    objects; my great love was battling with remorse, indignation, and despair; and
                    I stood wavering and distracted, looking, as it were, within for rest and
                    without for comfort, till the light seemed to leave my eyes, and the fire which
                    had flashed from them for a moment became suddenly extinguished.
I was recalled to consciousness by an exclamation from Lady Broadhem. "Heavens,
                    Frank, don't stare so wildly—you quite frighten me! I have only asked for your
                    advice, and you make use of expressions and fly off in a manner which nothing
                    but the excitability of your temperament can excuse. I assure you I am worried
                    enough without having my cares added to by your unkindness. There, if you want
                    to know the exact state of my affairs, look through my papers—you will find I am
                    a woman of business; and I have got an accurate list which I shall be able to
                    explain. Of course all the more important original documents are at my
                    solicitor's."
I sat moodily down without answering this semi-conciliatory, semi-plaintive
                    speech. I did not even take the trouble to analyse it. I felt morally and
                    physically exhausted. The long journey, the suspense, and this dénouement, had prostrated me. I took up the papers Lady Broadhem
                    offered me, and turned them vacantly over. I read the list, but failed to attach
                    any meaning to the items over which my gaze listlessly wandered. I felt that
                    Lady Broadhem was watching me curiously, but every effort I made to grasp the
                    details before me failed hopelessly. At last I threw the packet down in despair,
                    and, leaning over the table, clasped my bursting forehead with my hands.
"Dear Frank," said Lady Broadhem, and for the first time her voice betrayed signs
                    of genuine emotion, "I know I have been very imprudent, but I did it all for the
                    best. You can understand now why I hesitated to tell you everything at first.
                    You don't know how much it has cost me, and to what means I am obliged to resort
                    to keep up my courage; besides, I have got into such a habit of concealment that
                    I could not bear that even you should know the desperate state of our affairs,
                    though I had no idea that in so short a time you could have unravelled such
                    complicated accounts and arrived at the terrible result. Perhaps you would like
                    me to leave you for a few moments. I will go and say good-night to Ursula, whom
                    I heard going up-stairs just now."
I heard Lady Broadhem leave the room, but did not raise my head, and indeed only
                    slowly comprehended the purport of her last speech. As it dawned upon me, the
                    hopelessness of the whole situation seemed to overwhelm me. Chaos and ruin like
                    gaunt spectres stared me in the face! What mattered it if the Broadhem family
                    were bankrupt in estate, if I was to become bankrupt in mind? What matter if
                    they lost all their worldly possessions? Had I not lost all hope of Ursula since
                    I had heard of her attachment to Grandon, and with her every generous impulse of
                    my nature? Why should I save the family, even if I could? Why in this desert of
                    my existence spend a fortune on an oasis I was forbidden ever to enter or enjoy?
                    Why should I bring offerings to the shrine at which I might never worship? The
                    whole temple that enclosed it was tottering. Instead of helping to prop it up,
                    why not, like Samson, drag it down and let it bury me in its ruin? I threw
                    myself on the couch from which Lady Broadhem had risen, and, turning my face to
                    the wall, longed with an intense desire for an eternal release. At that moment
                    my hand, which I had thrust under the pillow, came in contact with something
                    hard and cold. I drew it out, and was startled to find that it was a small vial
                    labelled "POISON." I am not naturally superstitious, but this immediate response
                    to my thoughts seemed an indication so direct as to be almost supernatural. I
                    had hardly framed in definite terms the idea of a suicide which should at once
                    end my agony, when the means thereto were actually placed in my very hand. Even
                    had I doubted, the inward sense, the inspiration to which I trust, and which has
                    never yet failed me, said, Drink! It even whispered aloud, Drink! From every
                    corner of the room came soft pleasant murmurs of the same word. Beautiful sirens
                    floating round me bade me drink. Every thought of moral evil vanished in
                    connection with this final act. I looked forward with rapture to the long sleep
                    before me, and with a smile of the most intense and fervent gratitude I raised
                    the bottle to my lips. I remember thinking at the moment, "The smile is very
                    important—it shall play upon my lips to the end. Ursula, I die happy, for my
                    last thought is, that in the spirit I shall soon revisit thee," and the liquid
                    trickled slowly down my throat. It was not until I had drained the last drop
                    that I suddenly recognised the taste. It was the "pick-me-up" I always get at
                    Harris's, the apothecary in St James's Street, when my fit of nervous exhaustion
                    come on, but there seemed rather more of the spirituous ingredient in it than
                    usual. The life-stream began to tingle back through all my fibres—my miseries
                    took grotesque forms. "Ha! ha! Lady Broadhem! the means you take to keep up your
                    courage, which you so delicately alluded to just now, have come in most
                    opportunely. What a fool I was to make mountains out of molehills, and call the
                    little ills of life miseries! We will soon see what these little imprudences are
                    the old lady talks of." And I took up the papers with a hand rapidly becoming
                    steady, and glanced over them with an eye no longer confused and dim. Oh the
                    pleasure of the sensation of this gradual recovery of vigour of mind and force
                    of body!
I was engaged in this task, and making the most singular and startling
                    discoveries, the nature of which I shall shortly disclose, when I heard Lady
                    Broadhem coming down-stairs. I felt so angry with her for having been the means
                    of tempting me to commit a great sin, and for the trouble she was causing me
                    generally, that I followed the first impulse which my imagination suggested as
                    the best means of revenging myself upon her. Accordingly, when the door opened,
                    she found me stretched at full length on the sofa, my form rigid, my face fixed,
                    my eyes staring, my hands clenched, and my whole attitude as nearly that of a
                    person in a fit as I had time to make it.
"Gracious, what is the matter?" said she.
My lips seemed with difficulty to form the word "poison."
"Frank, speak to me!" and she seized my hand, which was not so cold as I could
                    have wished it, but which fell helplessly by my side as she let it drop.
"Poison!" I this time muttered audibly.
"Where did you get it?" said she, snappishly. For it began to dawn upon her that
                    I was not poisoned at all, but had discovered her secret. I turned my thumb
                    languidly in the direction of under the pillow. She hastily thrust in her hand
                    and pulled out the empty bottle. "You fool"—she actually used this expression; I
                    have heard other ladies do the same—"you fool," and she was literally furious,
                    "what did you go poking under the pillow for? You are no more poisoned than I
                    am; it is a draught I am obliged to take for nervous depression, and your
                    imagination has almost frightened you into a fit. I put 'poison' on it to keep
                    the servants from prying. Come, get up, be a man—do," and Lady Broadhem gave me
                    her hand, in consideration for my weakness to help myself up by.
"Dearest Lady Broadhem," said I, pressing it to my lips, "I cannot tell what
                    comfort you give me. I was just beginning to regret the world I thought I was
                    about to leave for ever, when your assurance that I have not taken poison, but a
                    tonic, makes me feel as grateful to you as if you had saved my life. I confess
                    that, when I found that you considered your affairs to be so desperate that you
                    had provided the most effectual mode of escape from them, I envied the superior
                    foresight which you had displayed, and determined to repair my error. If it is
                    worth dear Lady Broadhem's while to poison herself, I thought, it is surely
                    worth mine. But, after all, suicide is a cowardly act either in a man or a
                    woman; better far face the ills of life with the aid of stimulants, than fly for
                    refuge in the agony of a financial crisis to the shop of an apothecary."
"You are an incomprehensible creature, Frank," said Lady Broadhem; "I am sure I
                    hope for her own sake that Ursula will understand you better than I do; but as
                    your humours are uncertain, and you seem able to go into these affairs now, I
                    think we had better not waste any more time; only I do wish" (with a wistful
                    glance at the bottle) "you would provide yourself with your own draughts in
                    future."
"How lucky," thought I, as I put on a business-like air, and methodically began
                    arranging the papers according to their docquets. "Now, if it had been just the
                    other way, and her ladyship had taken the draught instead of me, how completely
                    I should have been at her mercy? Now I am master of the situation."
"'Greek loan, thirty thousand,'" I read, going down the list; "I am afraid this
                    is rather a losing business. I see they have been already held over for some
                    months. I suppose some of the —27,000 is to be absorbed there."
"Yes," said Lady Broadhem; "because if I can carry on for another fortnight, I
                    have got information which makes it certain I shall recover on them."
"What is this? five hundred pounds' worth of dollar bonds?" I went on.
"Oh, I only lost a few pounds on them. I bought them at threepence apiece and
                    sold them at twopence. Spiffy got me to take them off his hands, and, in fact,
                    made a great favour of it, as he says there is nothing people make money more
                    surely out of than dollar bonds."
"Bubbs's Eating-house and Cigar Divan Company, Holborn. Well, there is a strong
                    direction. How do you come by so many shares?"
"Lord Staggerton was one of the promoters, and had them allotted to me," said
                    Lady Broadhem. "He also was kind enough to put me into two Turkish baths, a
                    monster hotel, and a music-hall. You will see that I lost heavily in the Turkish
                    baths and the hotel, but the music-hall is paying well. Spiffy says I ought
                    never to stay so long in anything as I do; in and out again, if it is only half
                    a per cent, is his system; but Staggerton used to look after my interests, and
                    managed them very successfully. I am afraid that all my troubles commenced when
                    I quarrelled with him. He is now promoting two companies which I hear most
                    highly spoken of, but he says I must take my chance with others about shares,
                    and he won't advise me in the matter. One is 'The Metropolitan Crossing-Sweeping
                    Company,' of which he's to be chairman, and the other is the 'Seaside
                    Bathing-Machine Company.' Spiffy says they will both fail, because Staggerton
                    has not the means of having them properly brought out. Bodwinkle won't speak to
                    him, and unless either he or the Credit Foncier bring a thing out, there is not
                    the least chance of its taking with the public. They don't so much look at the
                    merits of the speculation as at the way in which it is put before them; and with
                    this system of rigging the market, so many people go in like me only to get out
                    again, that it is becoming more and more difficult every day to start anything
                    new. Oh dear," said Lady Broadhem, "how exhausted it always makes me to talk
                    'City!' I only want to show you that I understand what I am about, and that if
                    you can only help to tide me over this crisis, something will surely turn up a
                    prize."
"I know you disapprove of cards, but perhaps you will allow me to suggest the
                    word 'trump' as being more expressive than 'prize,'" I said. "Well, now we have
                    got through the companies, what have we here? Why, Lady Broadhem, you have
                    positively taken no less than seven unfurnished houses this year. What on earth
                    do you intend to do with them all?"
"My dear Frank, where have you been living for the last few years? Do with them?
                    Exactly what dozens of smart people, with very little to live on, do with
                    houses—let them, to be sure. I made —1100 last year in four houses, and all by
                    adding it on to the premiums. I don't like furnishing and putting it in the
                    rent. In the first place, one is apt to have disagreeable squabbles about the
                    furniture, which, however good you give people, they always say is shabby; and
                    in the second, you get much more into the hands of the house-agents."
"Well, but," I said, "here is one of the largest houses in London—rent,
                    unfurnished, —1500 a-year. That is rather hazardous: who do you expect will take
                    that?"
"Oh, that is the safest speculation of them all," said Lady Broadhem. "I had an
                    infinity of trouble to get it. Spiffy first suggested the plan to me, and we
                    found it succeed admirably last year. It was we who brought out Mrs Gorgon
                    Tompkins and her daughters. She took the house from me at my own rent on
                    condition that Spiffy managed her balls, and got all the best people in London
                    to go to them. This year we are going to bring out the Bodwinkles. It will be
                    much easier, because she is young, and has no family. He, you know, is a man of
                    immense wealth in the City—in fact, as I said before, his name is almost
                    essential to the success of any new company. I told his wife I could have
                    nothing to do with them unless he came into Parliament, for they are horridly
                    vulgar, and they were bound to do what they could for themselves before I could
                    think of taking them up. Lady Mundane positively refused to have anything to do
                    with them, and, in fact, I live so little in the world, though I keep it up to
                    some extent for the sake of my girls, that it was quite an accident my hearing
                    of them. Now, however, he has got into the House of Commons, and it is arranged
                    that she is to take the house, and Bodwinkle is to help Spiffy in City matters,
                    on condition that he gets all Lady Mundane's list to her first party. Poor
                    Spiffy is a little nervous, as Bodwinkle actually wanted to put it in writing on
                    a stamped paper; but he is so immensely useful to society, that the least people
                    can do is to be good-natured on an occasion of this kind."
"No fear of them," said I; "if Bodwinkle is the only man who can launch a company
                    in the City, no one can compete with Spiffy in launching a snob in Mayfair. But
                    I thought you never went to balls."
"I never do; but because I do not approve of dancing, there is no reason why I
                    should not let houses for the purpose. You might as well say a religious banker
                    ought not to open an account with a theatre, or a good brewer live by his beer,
                    because some people drink too much of it. If any one was to leave a gin-palace
                    to me in a legacy, I should not refuse the rent."
"Any more than you do the interest of your shares in the music-hall. And now,"
                    said I, coolly, gathering up all her papers and putting them in my pocket, "as
                    it is past one o'clock, and I see you are tired, I will take these away with me,
                    and let you know to-morrow what I think had better be done under the
                    circumstances."
"What are you doing, Frank? what an unheard-of proceeding! I insist upon your
                    leaving my papers here."
"If I do, you must look elsewhere for the money. No, Lady Broadhem"—I felt that
                    my moral ascendancy was increasing every moment, and that I should never have
                    such another opportunity of establishing it—"we had better understand each other
                    clearly. You regard me at this moment in the light of your future son-in-law,
                    and in that capacity expect me to extricate you and your family from your
                    financial difficulties. Now I am quite capable of 'behaving badly,' as the world
                    calls it, at the shortest notice. I told you at Dickiefield that I was totally
                    without principle, and we are both trusting to Ursula to reform me. But I will
                    relinquish the pleasure of paying your debts, and the advantage of being
                    reformed by your daughter, unless you agree to my terms."
"And they are?" said her ladyship, doggedly.
"First, that from this evening you put the entire management of your affairs into
                    my hands, and, as a preliminary measure, allow me to take away these papers,
                    giving me a note to your lawyer authorising him to follow my instructions in
                    everything; and, secondly, that you never, under any pretence, enter into any
                    company or speculation of any kind except with my permission."
A glance of very evil meaning shot across her ladyship's eyes as they met mine
                    after this speech, but I frightened it away by the savageness of my gaze, till
                    she was literally obliged to put her hand up to her forehead. The crisis was
                    exciting me, for Ursula was at stake, and it was just possible my conditions
                    might be refused; but I felt the magnetism of my will concentrating itself in my
                    eyes as if they were burning-glasses. It seemed to dash itself upon the reefs
                    and barriers of Lady Broadhem's rocky nature; the inner forces of our organisms
                    were engaged in a decisive struggle for the mastery; but the field of battle was
                    in her, not in me. I had invaded the enemy's country, and her frontier was as
                    long and difficult to defend as ours is in Canada. So I kept on pouring in
                    mesmeric reinforcements, as she sat with her head bent, and her whole moral
                    being in turmoil. Never before had any man ventured to dictate to this veteran
                    campaigner. The late Lord had been accustomed to regard her as infallible, and
                    Broadhem has not yet known the pleasures of independence. She never had friends
                    who were not servile, or permitted herself to be contradicted, except by a few
                    privileged ecclesiastics, and then only in unctuous and deprecatory tones. That
                    I, of whom the world was accustomed to speak in terms of compassion, and whom
                    she inwardly despised at this moment, should stand over her more unyielding and
                    imperious than herself, caused her to experience a sensation nearly allied to
                    suffocation. I seemed instinctively to follow the mental processes through which
                    she was passing, and a certain consciousness that I did so demoralised her. Now,
                    I felt, she is going to take me to task in a "sweet Christian spirit" about the
                    state of my soul, and I brought up "will" reinforcements which I poured down
                    upon her brain through the parting of her front, till she backed suddenly out of
                    the position, and took up a hostile, I might almost say an abusive, attitude.
                    Here again I met her with such a shower of invective, "uttered not, yet
                    comprehended," that after a silent contest she gave this up too, and finally
                    fell back on the flat rejection of me and my money altogether. This, I confess,
                    was the critical moment. She took her hand down when she came to this mental
                    resolution, and she looked at me, I thought, but it might have been imagination,
                    demoniacally. What had I to oppose to it? My love for Ursula? No; that would
                    soften me. My aversion to Lady Broadhem? No; for it was not so great as hers for
                    me. For a moment I wavered; my will seemed paralysed; her gaze was becoming
                    fascinating, while mine was getting clouded, till a mist seemed to conceal her
                    from me altogether. And now, at the risk of being misunderstood and ridiculed, I
                    feel bound to describe exactly the most remarkable occurrence of my life. At
                    that moment I saw distinctly, in the luminous haze which surrounded me, a fiery
                    cross. I have already said that objects of this kind often appeared to me in the
                    dark, apropos of nothing; but upon no former occasion had a lighted room become
                    dim, and a vision manifested itself within which seemed to answer to the
                    involuntary invocation for assistance that I made when I found the powers of my
                    own will beginning utterly to fail me; and, what was still more strange, never
                    before had any such manifestation effected an immediate revolution in my
                    sentiments. Up to that moment I had been internally fierce and overbearing in my
                    resolution to subdue the nature with which I was contending, and I was actually
                    defeated when I received this supernatural indication of assistance. Before the
                    dazzling vision had vanished, it had conveyed its lesson of self-sacrifice, and
                    created within me a new impulse, under the influence of which I solemnly vowed
                    that if I triumphed now I should use my victory for the good not only of those I
                    loved, but of her then sitting before me. The demon of my own nature, which had
                    evidently been struggling with the demon of hers, suddenly deserted me, and his
                    place seemed occupied by an angel of light, furnishing me with the powers of
                    exorcism, which were to be gained only at the sacrifice of self. My very breath
                    seemed instantly charged with prayers for her, at the moment I felt she regarded
                    me with loathing and hate.
An ineffable calm pervaded my whole being. A sense of happiness and gratitude
                    deprived the consciousness of the conquest which I had gained of any sentiment
                    of exultation; on the contrary, I felt gentle and subdued myself—anxious to
                    soothe and comfort her with that consolation I had just experienced. Ah, Lady
                    Broadhem! at that moment, had I not been in the presence of a "saint," I should
                    have fallen upon my knees. Perhaps as it was I might have done so, had she not
                    suddenly leant back exhausted.
"Frank," she said, "I seem to have been dreaming. I am subject to fits of violent
                    nervous depression, and the agitation of this scene has completely overcome me;
                    my brain seems stunned, and all my faculties have become torpid. I can think of
                    nothing more now, do what you like; all I want is to go to sleep. If you ring
                    the bell in that corner, Jenkins will come down. Good-night; I shall see you
                    to-morrow. Take the papers with you."
I took Lady Broadhem's hand—it was cold and clammy—and held it till her maid came
                    down. She had already fallen into a half-mesmeric sleep, but was not conscious
                    of her condition. I saw her safely on her way to her bedroom on the arm of her
                    maid, and left the house with my pockets full of papers, more fresh and
                    invigorated than I had felt for weeks. A new light had indeed dawned upon me.
                    For the first time one of these "hallucinations," as medical men usually term
                    them, to which I am subject, had contained a lesson. Not only had I profited
                    from it upon the spot, but it had suggested to me an entirely new line of
                    conduct in the great question which most nearly affected my own happiness, and
                    seemed to guarantee me the strength of will and moral courage which should
                    enable me to carry it out.
As I walked home, with the piercing March wind cutting me through, solemn
                    thoughts and earnest aspirations arose within me, and, struggling into existence
                    amid the wreck that seemed to strew the disturbed chambers of my brain, came the
                    prayer of an old saint, which, in years gone by, had fixed itself permanently in
                    some vacant niche of my mind:—
"Great God! I ask Thee for no meaner pelf, 
Than that I may not disappoint myself, 
That in my actions I may soar as high 
As I can now discern with this clear eye; 
And next in value what Thy kindness lends, 
That I may greatly disappoint my friends, 
Howe'er they think or hope that it might be, 
They may not dream how Thou'st distinguished me; 
That my weak hand may equal my firm faith, 
And my life practise more than my tongue saith; 
That my low conduct may not show, 
Nor my relenting lines, 
That I Thy purpose did not know, 
Or overrated Thy designs." 
Time alone will show whether the project I formed under the new influences which
                    were now controlling me, will ever be realised.
There is one point which I have in common with Archimedes,—my most brilliant
                    inspirations very often come to me in my tub, or while I am dressing. On the
                    morning following the scene above described, I trusted to this moment to furnish
                    me with an idea which should enable me to put my plan into operation, but I
                    sought in vain.
In the first place, though I assumed in the presence of Lady Broadhem a thorough
                    knowledge of the peculiar description of the transaction in which she was
                    engaged, I feel bound not to conceal from my readers that I have made it a rule
                    through life to confine my knowledge of business strictly to theory, and though
                    I am as thoroughly conversant with the terms of the Stock Exchange as with the
                    language of the swell mob, I avoid, in ordinary life, making use either of one
                    or the other. Hence I have always treated debentures, stock, scrip, coupons, and
                    all the jargon connected with such money-making and money-losing contrivances,
                    as pertaining to the abstract science of finance; nor do I ever desire to know
                    anything of them practically, feeling assured that the information thus acquired
                    is of a character calculated to exercise an injurious influence upon the moral
                    nature. I do not for a moment wish to reflect upon those honest individuals who
                    devote their whole lives to the acquisition of money and nothing else. Had one
                    of my own ancestors not done so, I should not now be the millionaire I am, and
                    able to write thus of the pursuit of wealth. But let no man tell me that the
                    supreme indifference to it which I entertain, does not place me upon a higher
                    platform than a gold-hunter can possibly aspire to. When, therefore, I looked
                    forward to an interview with the Honourable Spiffington Goldtip, I felt that I
                    incurred a very serious responsibility. Not being versed in the Capel Court
                    standard of morality, or being in the habit of treading those delicate lines
                    upon which Spiffy had learnt to balance himself so gracefully, I might, instead
                    of doing him good, be the means of encouraging him in that pecuniary scramble
                    which enabled him to gain a precarious livelihood.
"After all," I thought, "why not hover about the City with one's hands full of
                    gold, as one used to after dinner at Greenwich, when showers of copper delighted
                    the ragged crowd beneath, and have the fun of seeing all the mud-larking
                    Spiffys, fashionable and snobbish, scrambling in wild confusion, and rolling
                    fraternally over each other in the dirt? If I can't convert them, if I must be
                    'done' by them, I will 'do' to them as I would be 'done' by; and rather than
                    leave them to perish, will adopt an extreme measure, and keep on suffocating
                    them with the mud they delight to revel in, till they cry aloud for help. What a
                    pleasure it would be to wash Spiffy all over afterwards, and start him fresh and
                    sweet in a new line of life!" As I said before, I was in my tub myself as I made
                    this appropriate reflection; then my thoughts involuntarily reverted to
                    Chundango. When I had threatened Lady Broadhem with the mercenary spirit of that
                    distinguished Oriental, I inwardly doubted whether, indeed, it were possible for
                    her to propose any pecuniary sacrifice which he was not prepared to make, in
                    order to gain the social prize upon which he had set his heart; and I dreaded
                    lest I should have driven her in despair to have recourse to this "dark"
                    alternative,—whether, in order to save the Broadhem family from ruin and
                    disgrace—for I suspected that the papers I had carried away contained evidence
                    that the one was as possible as the other—Ursula would accede to the pressure of
                    the family generally, and of her mother in particular, whose wish none of her
                    children had ever dared to thwart, was a consideration which caused me acute
                    anxiety. I must prepare myself shortly for a conversation on the subject with
                    Grandon. What should I say to him? Granting that the means occasionally justify
                    the end, which I do not admit, what would be the use of making a false statement
                    either in the sense that I was, or that I was not, going to marry Ursula? If I
                    said I was, he would think me a traitor and her a jilt; if I said I was not, I
                    must go on and tell him that the family would be ruined and disgraced, or that
                    she must marry Chundango to save it. He would obtain comfort neither way. He had
                    evidently not seen the Broadhems, and was therefore sure now to be in blissful
                    ignorance that anything has happened at all. Better leave him so. If he is
                    convinced that Ursula loves him, he would never dream of her accepting me. Even
                    had our acquaintance been longer than it was, before I was so mad as to think of
                    proposing to her, the best thing I can do is certainly to hold my tongue; but
                    then, I thought, how will he account for my reserve? what can he think except
                    that it arises from an unworthy motive?—and I brushed my hair viciously. At that
                    instant I heard a thump at the door, and before I could answer, in walked the
                    subject of my meditation.
"Well, my dear old fellow," said Grandon, as he grasped my hand warmly, "how
                    mysterious and spasmodic you have been in your movements! I was afraid even now,
                    if I had not invaded the sanctity of your dressing-room, that you would have
                    slipped through my fingers. I know you have a great deal to tell me, of interest
                    to us both, and we are too fast friends to hesitate to confide in each other on
                    any matters which affect our happiness. True men never have any reticence as
                    between themselves; they only have recourse to that armour when they happen to
                    be cursed with false friends." I cannot describe my feelings during this speech.
                    How on earth was I to avoid reticence? how show him that I loved and trusted him
                    when I had just been elaborately devising a speech which should tell him
                    nothing? and I thought of our school and then our college days—how I never
                    seemed to be like other boys or other men of my own age—and how when nobody
                    understood me Grandon did, and how when nobody defended my peculiarities Grandon
                    did—how he protected and advised me at first out of sheer compassion, until at
                    last I had become as a younger brother to him. How distressed he was when I gave
                    up diplomacy, and how anxious during the five years that I was exploring in the
                    Far West and gold-digging in Australia! and how nothing but his letters ever
                    induced me to leave the wild reckless life that possessed such a wonderful charm
                    for me; and how he bore with my wilfulness and vanity—for the faults of my
                    character at such moments would become painfully apparent to me; and how now I
                    was going to return it all, by allowing him to suppose that I had deliberately
                    plotted against his happiness, and ruthlessly sapped the solid foundations upon
                    which our life's friendship had been built. He saw these painful thoughts
                    reflected but too accurately upon my face, for he had been accustomed to read it
                    for so many years, and he smiled a look of encouragement and kindliness. "Come,"
                    he said, "I will tell you exactly, first, everything I suspect, and then
                    everything I know, and then what I think about it, so that you will have as
                    little of the labour of revelation as possible. First of all, I suspect that you
                    imagine that I had proposed to Lady Ursula Newlyte before we met the other day
                    at Dickiefield: I need not say that in that case I should have told you as much
                    upon the evening we parted; I pledge you my word I have never uttered a syllable
                    to Lady Ursula from which she could suspect the state of my feelings towards
                    her, and she has never given me any indication that she returned my affection; I
                    therefore did not mention myself when you told me your intention of proposing to
                    her at Dickiefield; I only do so now in consequence of a letter which I received
                    from Lady Broadhem last night."
"A letter from Lady Broadhem?" said I, aghast.
"Yes," he said, "in which she encloses a copy of one of yours containing a
                    proposal to Lady Ursula, and informs me that you were aware, when you made it,
                    of the difficulties you might have to encounter through me. She goes on to say
                    that, whatever may have been her daughter's feelings towards me at one time,
                    they have completely changed, as she at once accepted you; and she winds up with
                    the rather unnecessary remark that this is the less to be regretted by me, as
                    under no circumstances would I have obtained either her consent or that of Lord
                    Broadhem. And so," my poor friend went on, but his lips were quivering, and I
                    turned away my eyes to avoid seeing the effort it cost him—"and so, you see, my
                    dear Frank, it is all for the best. In the first place, she never loved me. I
                    have too high an opinion of her to suppose that if she had, she would have
                    accepted you; in the second, she would never have married me against her
                    mother's consent—and so, even if she had loved me, we should have both been
                    miserable; and thirdly, if there is one thing that could console me under such a
                    blow, it is, that the man she loves, and the family approve, is my dear old
                    friend, who is far more worthy the happiness in store for him than I should have
                    been." He put his hand kindly on my shoulder as his strong voice shook with the
                    force of his suppressed emotion, and I bowed my head. I felt utterly humiliated
                    by a magnanimity so noble, and by a tenderness surpassing that of women. I
                    thanked God at that moment that Lady Ursula did not love
                    me, and I vowed that Lady Broadhem should bitterly expiate her sins against us
                    both. Here, then, was the secret of her refusing to acknowledge that she had
                    stolen my missing letter at Dickiefield, and this was the precious use she had
                    made of it. The question now was, What was to be done? But my mind was
                    paralysed—all its strength seemed expended in vowing vengeance against Lady
                    Broadhem. When I tried to form a sentence of explanation to Grandon, my brain
                    refused its functions; I felt as if I were in a net, and that the slightest
                    movement on my part would entangle me more inextricably in its meshes. The last
                    resolution I had come to before he entered the room was on no account to tell
                    him anything, and this resolution had now become an idée
                        fixe. I had not clearness of mind at the moment to decide whether it
                    was right or wrong. I felt that when my head was clear I had come to the
                    conclusion that it was best, so I stuck to it now. True, it involved leaving him
                    in the delusion that Ursula and I were engaged—but was it altogether certain to
                    remain a delusion? Did Lady Ursula really care for him? I had only Lady
                    Broadhem's word for it. Again, had I anything better to give him? would it be a
                    comfort to him to hear the Chundango alternative? These in a confused way were
                    the thoughts which flitted across my brain in this moment of doubt and
                    difficulty, so I said nothing. He misinterpreted my silence, and thought me
                    overwhelmed with remorse at the part I had played. "Believe me," he said, "I do
                    not think one particle the worse of you for what you have done; I know how
                    difficult it is to control one's feelings in moments of passion; and you see you
                    were quite right not to believe Lady Broadhem when she told you Ursula cared for
                    me."
"I had already written the letter," I stammered out.
"Of course you had: I never supposed you could do the dishonourable thing of
                    hearing she cared about me first, and writing to her afterwards, although Lady
                    Broadhem said so. When you did make the discovery that Lady Ursula's affections
                    were not already engaged, you were perfectly right to win her if you could. I
                    only bargain that you ask me to be your best man."
This was a well-meant but such a very unsuccessful attempt at resignation on
                    Grandon's part, that it touched me to the quick. "My dear Grandon," I said—and I
                    saw my face in the glass opposite, looking white and stony with the effort it
                    cost me not to fall upon his neck and cry like a woman—"I solemnly swear,
                    whatever you may think now, that the day will come when you will find that I was
                    worthy the privilege of having been even your friend. I was going to say, Till
                    then, believe me and trust me; but I need not, for I know that, however
                    unnatural it seems for me to ask you not to allude again to the subject we have
                    just been discussing, you will be satisfied that I would not ask it without
                    having a reason which if you knew you would approve. On my conscience I believe
                    that I am right in reserving from you my full confidence for the first time in
                    my life; but do not let the fact of one forbidden topic alienate us—let it
                    rather act as another link, hidden for the moment, but which may some day prove
                    the most powerful to bind us together."
Grandon's face lit up with a bright frank smile. "I trust and believe in you from
                    the bottom of my soul, and you shall bury any subject you like till it suits you
                    to exhume it. Come, we will go to breakfast, and I will discourse to you on the
                    political and military expediency of spending —200,000 on the fortifications of
                    Quebec."
"Well," thought I, as I followed Grandon down-stairs, "for a man who is yearning
                    to be honest, and to do the right thing by everybody, I have got into as
                    elaborate a complication of lies as if I were a Russian diplomatist. First, I
                    have given both Lady Broadhem and Grandon distinctly to understand that I am at
                    this moment engaged to Ursula, which I am not; and secondly, I have solemnly
                    assured that young lady herself that I am conscious of being occasionally
                    mad."
In this tissue of falsehoods, it is poor consolation to think that the only one
                    in which there may be some foundation of truth is the last. Supposing I was to
                    go in for dishonesty, perhaps I could not help telling the truth by the rule of
                    "contraries." I will go and ask the Honourable Spiffington whether he finds this
                    to be the case, and I parted from Grandon in the hope of catching that gentleman
                    before he had betaken himself to his civic haunts. I was too late, and pursued
                    him east of Temple Bar. Here he frequented sundry "board-rooms" of companies
                    which by a figure of speech he helped to "direct," and was also to be found in
                    the neighbourhood of Hercules Passage and the narrow streets which surround the
                    Stock Exchange, in the little back dens of pet brokers upon whom he relied for
                    "good things." Spiffy used to collect political news in fashionable circles all
                    through the night and up to an early hour of the morning, and then come into the
                    City with it red-hot, so as to "operate." He was one of the most lively little
                    rabbits to be found in all that big warren of which the Bank is the centre, and
                    popped in and out of the different holes with a quickness that made him very
                    difficult to catch. At last I ran him to a very dingy earth, where he was
                    pausing, seated on a green baize table over a glass of sherry and a biscuit, and
                    chaffing a rising young broker who hoped ultimately to be proposed by Spiffy for
                    the Piccadilly Club. He was trying to establish a claim thereto now, on the
                    strength of having been at Mrs Gorgon Tompkins's ball on the previous evening.
                    "It is rather against you than otherwise," said Spiffy, who was an extremely
                    off-hand little fellow, and did not interrupt his discourse after he had nodded
                    to me familiarly; "I can't afford to take you up yet; indeed, what have you ever
                    done to merit it? and Mrs Gorgon Tompkins has enough to do this season to keep
                    her own head above water without attempting to float you. I did what I could for
                    her last night, but she can't expect to go on with her successes of last year.
                    We had a regular scene at 6 A.M. this morning, 'in banquet
                    halls deserted'—tears, and all that sort of thing—nobody present but self,
                    Gorgon, and partner. We took our last year's list, and compared them with the
                    invitations sent out this year. The results were painful; only the fag-end of
                    the diplomatic corps had responded—none of the great European powers present,
                    and our own Cabinet most slenderly represented. Obliged to resort for young men
                    to the byways and hedges; no expense spared, and yet the whole affair a
                    miserable failure."
"Have you tried lobsters boiled in champagne at supper, as a draw?" said I.
"No," said Spiffy, looking at me with admiration; "I did not know this sort of
                    thing was in your line, Frank." He had not the least right to call me Frank; but
                    as everybody, whether they knew him or not, called him Spiffy, he always
                    anticipated this description of familiarity.
"To tell you the truth, I could pull the Tompkinses through another season, but I
                    am keeping all my best ideas for the Bodwinkles. Bodwinkles' first ball is to
                    cost —2000. He wanted me to do it for —1500, and I should have been able to do
                    it for that if Mrs Bodwinkle had had any h's; but the crême, de la crême require an absence of aspirations to
                    be made up to them somehow. Oh, with the extra £500 I can do it easily," said
                    Spiffy, with an air of self-complacency. "She is a comparatively young woman,
                    you see, without daughters; that simplifies matters very much. And then
                    Bodwinkle can be so much more useful to political men than Gorgon Tompkins; the
                    only fear is that he may commit himself at a late hour at the supper-table, but
                    I have hit on a notion which will overcome all these possible contretemps."
"What is that?" said I, curiously.
"In confidence, I don't mind telling you, as you are not in the line yourself;
                    but it is a master-stroke of genius. Like all great ideas, its merit lies in its
                    simplicity."
"Don't keep us any longer in suspense; I promise not to appropriate it."
"Well," said Spiffy, triumphantly, "I am going to pay the
                    aristocracy to come!"
"Pay them!" said I, really astounded; "how on earth are you going to get them to
                    take the money?"
"Ah, that is the secret. Wait till the Bodwinkles' ball. You will see how
                    delicately I shall contrive it; a great deal more neatly than you do when you
                    leave your doctor's fee mysteriously wrapped in paper upon his mantelpiece. I
                    shall no more hurt that high sense of honour, and that utter absence of anything
                    like snobbism which characterises the best London Society, than a French cook
                    would offend the nostrils of his guests with an overpowering odour of garlic;
                    but it is a really grand idea."
"Worthy of Julius C—sar, Charlemagne, or the first Napoleon," said I; "posterity
                    will recognise you as a social giant with a mission, if the small men and the
                    envious of the present day refuse to do so."
"I don't mind telling you," Spiffy went on, "that the idea first occurred to me
                    in a Scotch donkey-circus, where I won, as a prize for entering the show, a red
                    plush waistcoat worth five shillings. The fact is, Bodwinkle is so anxious to
                    get people, he would go to any expense; he has even offered me a commission on
                    all the accepted invitations I send out for him, graduated on a scale
                    proportioned to the rank of the acceptor. I am afraid it would not be considered
                    quite the right thing to take it; what do you think?"
"I doubt whether society would stand that. You must bring them to it gradually.
                    At present, I feel sure they would draw the line at a 'commission.' Apropos of
                    the Bodwinkles, I want to have a little private conversation with you."
"I am awfully done," said Spiffy. "I never went to bed at all last night. I got
                    some information about Turkish certificates before I went to the Tompkinses;
                    then I stayed there till past six, and had to come on here at ten to turn what I
                    knew to account. However, go ahead; what is it in? Jones here will do it for
                    you. No need of mystery between us. 'Cosmopolitan district' is the sort of thing
                    I can conscientiously recommend—I'll tell you why: I went down to the lobby of
                    the House last night on purpose to hear what the fellows were saying who prowl
                    about there pushing what my wretched tailor would call 'a little bill' through
                    Committee. It is becoming a sort of 'ring,' and the favourites last night were
                    light Cosmopolitans."
"What on earth are they as distinguished from heavy?" I asked.
"Jones, show his lordship the stock-list," said Spiffy, with a swagger.
The investigation of the "list" completely bewildered me. Why a —10 share should
                    be worth —19, and a —100 share worth —99, 10s., in the same company, was not
                    evident on the face of the document before me, so I looked into Spiffy's.
"Puzzling, isn't it?" said Spiffy.
"Very," I replied. "Now tell me," and I turned innocently towards Mr Jones, for
                    Spiffy's expression was secretive and mysterious—"explain to me how it is that a
                    share upon which only —10 has been paid, should be so much more valuable than
                    one which has been fully paid up."
"Ask the syndicate," said Jones, looking at Spiffy in a significant way.
I felt quite startled, for I expected to see a group of foreigners composing this
                    institution walk into the room. It was not until I had looked again to Spiffy
                    for information, and was met by the single open eye of that gentleman, that I
                    drew an inference and a very long breath.
"Spiffy," I said, "I am getting stifled—the moral atmosphere of this place is
                    tainted; take me to the sweetest board-room in the neighbourhood—I want to speak
                    to you on private business."
"Haven't time," said Spiffy, looking at his watch.
"Not to settle little Lady Broadhem's little affair?" said I, in a whisper.
Spiffy got uncommonly pale, but recovered himself in a second. "All right, old
                    fellow;" and he poured a few hurried words in an incomprehensible dialect into
                    Jones's ear, and led the way to the Suburban Washing-ground Company's
                    board-room, which was the most minute apartment of the kind I had ever seen.
I shall not enter into the particulars of what passed between Spiffy and myself
                    on this occasion. In the first place, it is so dry that it would bore you; in
                    the second place, it was so complicated, and Spiffy's explanations seemed to
                    complicate it so much the more, that I could not make it clear to you if I
                    wished; and, in the last, I do not feel justified in divulging all Lady
                    Broadhem's money difficulties and private crises. Suffice it to say, that in the
                    course of our conversation Spiffy was obliged to confide to me many curious
                    facts connected with his own line of life, and more especially with the peculiar
                    functions which he exercised in his capacity of a "syndic," under the seal of
                    solemn secrecy. Without the hold over him which this little insight into his
                    transactions has given me, I should not be able to report so much of our
                    conversation as I have. Nevertheless I thought it right to tell him how much of
                    it he would shortly see in print.
"Gracious, Frank," said Spiffy, petrified with alarm, "you don't mean to say you
                    are going to publish all I told you about the Gorgon Tompkinses and the
                    Bodwinkles? How am I ever to keep them going if you do? Besides, there are a
                    number of other fellows in the same line as I am. Just conceive the injury you
                    will inflict upon society generally—nobody will thank you. The rich 'middles'
                    who are looking forward to this kind of advancement will be furious; all of us
                    'promoters' will hate you, and 'la haute' will probably
                    cut you. Why can't you keep quiet, instead of trying to get yourself and
                    everybody else into hot water?"
"Spiffy," said I, solemnly, "when I devoted myself to 'mission work,' as they
                    call it in Exeter Hall, I counted the cost, as you will see on referring back to
                    my first chapter. I am still only at the beginning. I have a long and heavy task
                    before me; but my only excuse for remaining in society is that I am labouring
                    for its regeneration."
"You won't remain in it long," said Spiffy, "if you carry on in your present
                    line. What do you want to do? Eradicate snobbism from the British breast?—never!
                    We should all, from the highest to the lowest, perish of inanition without
                    it."
"Society," said I, becoming metaphorical, "is like a fluid which is pervaded by
                    that ingredient which you call 'snobbism,' the peculiarity of which is that you
                    find it in equal perfection when it sinks to the bottom and becomes dregs, and
                    when it rises to the surface and becomes cr—me—though of
                    course it undergoes some curious chemical changes, according to its position.
                    However, that is only one of the elements which pollute what should be a
                    transparent fluid. I am subjecting it just now to a most minute and careful
                    analysis, and I feel sure I shall succeed in obtaining an interesting
                    'precipitate.' I do most earnestly trust both you and the world at large will
                    profit by my experiments."
"Frank, you are a lunatic," said Spiffy, with a yawn, for I was beginning to bore
                    him. "I suppose I can't help your publishing what you like, only you will do
                    yourself more harm than me. Let me know when society has 'precipitated' you out
                    of it, and I will come and see you. Nobody else will. Good-bye!"
"He calls me a lunatic," I murmured, as I went down-stairs; "I thought that I
                    should be most likely to hear the truth by applying to the Honourable
                    Spiffington."
The same reasons which have compelled me to maintain a certain reserve in
                    relating my conversation with this gentleman prevent me fully describing the
                    steps which I am at present taking to arrange Lady Broadhem's affairs, and which
                    will occupy me during the Easter recess. Now, thank goodness, I think I see my
                    way to preventing the grand crash which she feared, but I decline to state the
                    amount of my own fortune which will be sacrificed in the operation. The great
                    inconvenience of the whole proceeding is the secrecy which it necessarily
                    involves. Grandon is under the impression that I am gambling on the Stock
                    Exchange, and is miserable in consequence, because he fancies I add to that sin
                    the more serious one of denying it. Lady Ursula, whom I have avoided seeing
                    alone, but who knows that I am constantly plotting in secret with her mother, is
                    no doubt beginning to think that I am wicked as well as mad, and is evidently
                    divided between the secret obligation of keeping the secret of my insanity, and
                    her dread lest in some way or other her mother should be the victim of it. Lady
                    Bridget is unmistakably afraid of me. The other day when I went into the
                    drawing-room and found her alone, she turned as pale as a sheet, jumped up, and
                    stammered out something about going to find mamma, and rushed out of the room.
                    Did I not believe in Ursula as in my own existence, I could almost fancy she had
                    betrayed me. Then there is Broadhem. He is utterly puzzled. He knows that I am
                    come to pull the family out of the mess, and put his own cherished little person
                    into a financially sound condition; and he is equally well assured that I would
                    not make this sacrifice without feeling certain of marrying his sister. But, in
                    the first place, that any man should sacrifice anything, either for his sister
                    or any other woman, is a mystery to Broadhem; and, in the second, I strongly
                    suspect that Ursula has said something which makes him very doubtful whether she
                    is engaged to me or not. Poor girl! I feel for her. Was ever a daughter and
                    sister before placed in the embarrassing position of leaving her own mother and
                    brother in the delusion that she was engaged to be married to a man who had
                    never breathed to her the subject of his love, much less of matrimony? Then
                    Spiffy and Lady Broadhem's lawyer both look upon the marriage as settled: how
                    else can they account for the trouble I am taking, and the liberality I am
                    displaying? There is something mysterious, moreover, in the terms upon which I
                    am in the house. Lady Broadhem is beginning to think it unnatural that I should
                    not care to see more of Ursula; and whenever she is not quite absorbed with
                    considering her own affairs, is making the arrangement known among mammas by the
                    expression, "bringing the young people together"—as if any young people who
                    really cared to be together, could not bring themselves together without mamma
                    or anybody else interfering. Fortunately Lady Broadhem is so much more taken up
                    with her own speculations than with either her daughter's happiness or mine,
                    that I am always able to give the conversation a City turn when she broaches the
                    delicate subject of Ursula. How Ursula manages on these occasions I cannot
                    conceive, but I do my best to prevent Lady Broadhem talking about me to her, as
                    I always say mysteriously, that if she does, "it will spoil everything"—an
                    alarming phrase, which produces an immediate effect. Still it is quite clear
                    that this kind of thing can't continue long. If I can only keep matters going
                    for a few days more, they will all be out of town for Easter, and that will give
                    me time to breathe. As it is, it is impossible to shut my eyes to the fact, that
                    my best friend is beginning to doubt me—that the girl I love dreads me—and that
                    the rest of the family, and those sufficiently connected with it to observe my
                    proceedings, either pity, laugh at, or despise me. This, however, by no means
                    prevents their using their utmost endeavours to ruin me. That is the present
                    state of matters. The situation cannot remain unchanged during the next four
                    weeks. Have I your sympathies, dear reader? Do you wish me well out of it?
