<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
CHAPTER IV.
In a ripe civilization such as ours there are formulas provided to meet the requirements of
      every exigency that may possibly arise; but amongst them there is not one which teaches us how
      to greet a person come back from the dead, because it is held impossible that such a
      contingency can occur. Perhaps this is the reason why Jim Burgoyne, usually a docile and
      obedient member of the society to which he belongs, now flies in the face of all the precepts
      instilled into him by that society's code. At the sight of Elizabeth Le Marchant entering the
      room, clad in a very neat tailor gown, instead of the winding-sheet with which he had credited
      her, he at first stands transfixed, staring at her with a hardness of intensity which is
      allowed to us in the case of Titian's "Bella," or Botticelli's "Spring," but has never been
      accounted permissible in the case of a more living loveliness. Then, before he can control, or
      even question the impulse that drives him, it has carried him to her.
"Elizabeth!" he says, in that sort of awed semi-whisper with which one would salute a being
      plainly returned from the other side, fearing that the fulness of a living voice might strike
      too strongly on his disused ear—"is it really Elizabeth?"
Had Burgoyne been quite sure, even now, of that fact; if he had had his wits well about him,
      he would certainly not have addressed her by her Christian name. But from the dead the small
      pomps and ceremonies of earth fall off. We think of them by their naked names—must we not then
      appeal to them by the same when they reappear before us?
The girl—for she does not look much more—thus rudely and startlingly bombarded, drops her
      Baedeker out of her slim-gloved hand, and with a positive jump at the suddenness of the
      address, looks back apprehensively at her interlocutor. In her eyes is, at first, only the
      coldly frightened expression of one discourteously assailed by an insolent stranger; but in a
      space of time as short as had served him to note the same metamorphosis in the case of her
      parents, he sees the look of half—three-quarter—whole recognition dawn in her eyes,
      followed—alas! there can be no mistake about it—by the same aspiration after flight. There is
      no reason why she should not recognise him again at once. He has fallen a prey neither to hair
      nor fat—the two main disguisers and disfigurers of humanity. His face is as smooth and his
      figure as spare as when, ten years ago, he had given the pretty tomboy of sixteen lessons in
      jumping the ha-ha. And as to her identity, no shadow of doubt any longer lingers in his
      mind.
The violence and shock of his attack have made her crimson, have matched her cheeks with
      those long-withered damasks in the Moat garden, with which they used to vie in bloomy
      vividness. But even yet he does not treat her quite as if she were really and veritably
      living; he has not yet got back his conventional manners.
"I thought you were dead," he says, his voice not even yet raised to its ordinary key, some
      vague awe still subduing it.
It must be a trick of his excited imagination that makes it seem to him as if she said under
      her breath, "So I am!"
But before he has had time to do more than distrust the testimony of his ears, Mrs. Le
      Marchant strikes in quickly—
"We cannot help what Mr. Burgoyne thinks," says she, with a constrained laugh; "but you are
      not dead, are you, Elizabeth? We are neither of us dead; on the contrary, we are very much
      alive. Who can help being alive in this heavenly place? And you? When did you come? What hotel
      are you at? Have you been here long? Do you make a long stay?"
She pours out her questions with such torrent-force and rapidity, as gives to her auditor
      the conviction that it is her aim to have a monopoly of them.
After one look of unbounded astonishment at his companion's onslaught, Byng has withdrawn to
      a discreet distance.
"You never mentioned her when I met you in Oxford," says Burgoyne, disregarding her trivial
      and conventional questions, and turning his eyes away with difficulty from his old
      playfellow.
Mrs. Le Marchant laughs again, still constrainedly.
"Probably you never asked after her."
"I was afraid," he says solemnly; "after ten years one is afraid; and as you did not mention
      her—you know you mentioned all the others—I thought you had lost her!"
A sort of slight shiver passes over the woman's frame.
"No, thank God! No!"
During the foregoing little dialogue about herself, Elizabeth has stood with her eyes on the
      ground; but at the end of it she lifts them to smile lovingly at her mother. They are very
      pretty eyes still, but surely they seem to have cried a good deal; and now that the hurrying
      blood has left her cheek again, Burgoyne sees that she looks more nearly her age than he had
      imagined at the first glance. He has not heard her voice yet; she has not spoken, unless that
      first shaken whisper—so much more likely to be the freak of his own heated fancy—could count
      for speech. He must hear her tones. Do they keep an echo of the other world, as he still
      imagines that he sees a shade from it lying lingeringly across her face?
"Do you ever climb apple-trees now?" he asks abruptly. She starts slightly, and again,
      though with a weaker red wave, her rather thin cheeks grow tinged.
"Did I ever climb them?" she says, with a bewildered look, and speaking in a somewhat
      tremulous voice. "Yes"—slowly, as if with an effort of memory—"I believe I did."
"You have forgotten all about it?" cries Jim, in an accent of absurdly disproportioned
      disappointment. "Have you forgotten the kangaroo too? have you forgotten everything?"
Perhaps she is putting her memory to the same strain as he had done his in the case of her
      mother's name on the occasion of their Oxford meeting. At all events, she leaves the question
      unanswered, and the elder woman again hurries to her help against this persistent claimant of
      reminiscences.
"You must not expect us all to have such memories as you have," she says with a touch of
      friendliness in her look.
"I must own that I too had quite forgotten the kangaroo; and so I fear had Robert, until you
      reminded us of it in Mesopotamia."
"How is Mr. Le Marchant?" inquires Jim, thus reminded to put his tardy query—"is he with
      you?"
"No, he is not very fond of being abroad; it is not"—smiling—"'dear abroad' to him, but I
      think that he will very likely come out to Florence to fetch us."
"You are going to Florence?" cries the young man eagerly. "So am I! oh, hurrah! then we
      shall often meet."
But the touch of friendliness, whose advent he had hailed so joyfully, has vanished out of
      Mrs. Le Marchant's voice, or, at least, is overlaid with a species of stiffness, as she
      answers distantly, "We do not intend to go out at all in Florence—I mean into society."
"But I am not society," replies he, chilled, yet resolute. "I wish"—glancing rather
      wistfully from one to the other—"that I could give you a little of my memory. If I
      could, you would see that, after being so infinitely good to me at the Moat, you cannot expect
      me to meet you as total strangers now."
In the sense of ill-usage that fills his breast, the fact of how almost entirely oblivious
      he had been of the persons before him, during the greater part of the long interval that had
      parted them, has—such is human nature—quite slipped his recollection. It is brought back to
      him in some degree with a twinge by Mrs. Le Marchant saying in a relenting tone, and with an
      accent of remorse, "And you have remembered us all these years?"
He cannot, upon reflection, conscientiously say that he has; but is yet disingenuous enough
      to allow a speaking silence to imply acquiescence.
"And you are on your way to Florence too?" continues she, mistaking the cause of his
      dumbness; the tide of compunction evidently setting more strongly towards him, in her womanly
      heart, at the thought of the entire want of interest she has manifested in the case of one
      whose long faithfulness to her and her family had deserved a better treatment.
"Yes."
His face clouds so perceptibly as he pronounces this monosyllable, that his interlocutor
      inquires, with a growing kindness:
"Not on any unpleasant errand, I hope?"
He laughs the uneasy laugh of an Anglo-Saxon obliged to tell, or at all events telling, some
      intimate detail about himself.
"I am going to see my young woman—the girl I am engaged to."
"Well, that is a pleasant errand, surely?" (smiling).
"C'est salon!" replies Jim gloomily. "I have a piece of ill-news to tell her;"
      then, with a half-shy effort to escape into generalities, "which way do you think that
      ill-news read best—on paper or vivâ voce?"
She shivers a little.
"I do not know. I do not like them either way."
Then, taking out her watch, with the evident determination to be surprised at the lateness
      of the hour, she cries, "It is actually a quarter to two! Are not you famished, Elizabeth? I
      am!"
There is such apparent and imminent departure in her eye that Burgoyne feels that there is
      no time to be lost.
"Have you decided upon your hotel in Florence?" he asks precipitately.
"We have decided against them all," is her answer. "We have taken a little apartment—a poor
      little entresol; but it is such a poor little one, that I should be ashamed to ask
      any of my friends to come and see me there."
She accompanies the last words, as if to take the sting out of them, with as sweet and
      friendly a smile as any he remembers in the Devonshire days. But the sting is not taken out,
      all the same; it lingers, pricking and burning still, after both the tall, thin, black figure,
      and the slim, little gray one have disappeared.
The moment that this is the case, Byng rejoins his friend; a curiosity and alert interest in
      his young eyes, which his companion feels no desire to gratify. He is unable, however, to
      maintain the entire silence he had intended upon the subject, since Byng, after waiting for
      what, to his impatience, appears a more than decent interval, is constrained to remark—
"Did I hear you tell that lady, when first you spoke to her, that she was dead?"
"I thought she was."
"Had you heard it?"
"No."
"Did you see it in the papers?"
"No."
A pause.
"I wonder why you thought she was dead."
The other makes a rather impatient movement.
"I had no reason—none whatever. It was an idiotic inference."
Byng draws a long breath of satisfaction.
"Well, at all events, I am very glad that she is not."
Jim turns upon him with something of the expression of face worn by Mrs. Sarah Gamp on
      hearing Mrs. Prig express her belief that it was not by Mrs. Harris that her services would be
      required. "Why should you be glad of that, Betsy? She is unbeknown to you except by hearing.
      Why should you be glad?"
As Byng's case is a more aggravated one than Mrs. Prig's, seeing that Elizabeth Le Marchant
      is 'unbeknown' to him even by hearing, so is the warmth, or rather coldness, with which his
      friend receives his remark not inferior to that of "Sairey."
"I do not quite see how it affects you. Why are you glad?"
"Why am I glad?" replies the younger man, with a lightening eye. "For the same
      reason that I am glad that Vandyke painted that picture"—pointing to it—"or that Shakespeare
      wrote As You Like It. The world is the richer by them all three."
But to this poetic and flattering analogy, Jim's only answer is a surly "Humph!"
</div></body></text></TEI>