<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
CHAPTER X.
There is no particular mirth in Burgoyne's mind as he mounts the stone stairs of the house
      which announces itself as 12 bis, in the commonplace new square of the Piazza d'Azeglio. But
      yet it is evident that, if he wishes to be in tune with the mood of the family to whom he is
      going to pay his respects, he must be not only mirthful, but musical. As the door of the
       entresol, to which he is directed by the porter, opens in answer to his ring, bursts
      of laughter, among which he can plainly detect the voice of Byng, assail his ear, mingled with
      music, or rather noise of a sort, but what sort his ear, without fuller evidence than is yet
      before it, is unable to decide. The person who has admitted him is an elderly Englishwoman,
      whose features at once strike him as familiar—so familiar that it needs scarcely one reaching
      back of memory's hand to capture the fact of her having filled the office of nurse at the
      Moat, at the period when the nursery there had been the scene of those frantic romps in which
      he himself had taken a prominent part, and in which Elizabeth had been to him by turns so able
      a second, or so vigorous an adversary. He would like to claim acquaintance with her, and,
      perhaps, if she had made any difficulty as to admitting him, might have screwed up his courage
      to do so; but as she lets him in without delay or hesitation, he follows her in silence along
      the passage of a by no means imposing little entresol—they are not so well off as
      they used to be, is his passing thought—is ushered into a small sitting-room, and, entering
      behind his own name, which has been completely drowned by the din issuing from within, has
      time, before the consciousness of his own appearance has disturbed it, to take in the details
      of a group which his entry naturally breaks up. Set slantwise across one angle of the room is
      an open cottage-piano, and beside it stands Elizabeth, her elbow resting on the top, and all
      her pensive face convulsed with helpless laughter. Upon the music-stool is seated a large
      collie dog, supported from behind in an upright position by Byng. Before him is a score of
      music, from which he is obviously supposed to be playing, as indeed he is doing in a
      sense—that is to say, he is bringing down first one large paw and then another heavily on the
      keys, accompanying each crash with a short howl to express the agony inflicted upon his nerves
      by his own performance. The scene is so entirely different a one from what he had expected:
      the immoderately laughing Elizabeth has so much more kinship with the sweet hoyden of the Moat
      than with the pale woman with a history of his two last meetings, that for a second or two
      Burgoyne stands in the doorway as if stunned. It is not till Mrs. Le Marchant, coming out of
      an inner room, advances to greet him, that he recovers himself.
"How do you do?" she says, smiling, and with less constraint than he has of late learnt to
      expect. "Are you fond of music?" (putting, as she speaks, her hands up to her ears). "I hope
      so! Did you ever hear such a shocking noise?"
"I do not know which I admire most, the vocal or the instrumental part of the performance,"
      replies he, laughing; but even as he speaks both cease.
Elizabeth lifts her elbow from the piano, and Byng removes his hands from under the dog's
      arms, who at once, joyful and released, jumps down, upsetting his music-stool with the impetus
      of his descent, and yet immediately, with all a dog's real good-heartedness, begins to swing a
      handsome tail, to show that he bears no real malice for the odious practical joke that has
      been played upon him. The clamorous fall of dog and music-stool reveals an object which had
      been hidden behind both, in the shape of a little boy, in whose behalf, as it darts across
      Jim's mind, the eccentric concert, for which he has come in, must have been got up.
"Oh, do go on!" cries the child shrilly. "Oh, do make him do it again! Oh,
      why do you stop?"
And indeed through the whole of the ensuing conversation this cry recurs at short intervals
      with the iteration of a guinea-hen. But none of the three performers seems disposed to comply
      with this request. Two of them sit down decorously on chairs, and the third throws himself
      upon the floor panting, showing a fine red tongue, and dragging himself luxuriously along on
      his stomach to show his relief at his corvée being ended. The child has followed
      Elizabeth, and now stands beside her, tiresomely pulling at her white hands.
"Bertie has come to spend the day with us," she says, looking explanatorily up at Jim, but
      speaking with a formality very different, as he feels, from the exuberant ease and mirth that
      had marked her intercourse with Byng.
Jim had already had a flash of speculation about the child, as to whether he might be a
      late-come little brother, arrived on the scene at a period subsequent to his own connection
      with the family; since plainly the span of his small life did not stretch to a decade.
"Bertie is a new friend," he says kindly. "I do not know Bertie."
"His mother, Mrs. Roche, is a cousin of ours; she has a villa on Bellosguardo. Perhaps you
      know her?"
"I am going to a party at her house on Wednesday," cries Jim, in a tone of eager pleasure at
      the discovery of this fresh link, and of the vista of probable meetings which it opens up. "I
      shall meet you there?"
Elizabeth turns her head slightly aside and shakes it as slightly.
"No?"
"We are not going out."
The formula implies mourning, and yet the clothes both of Elizabeth and her mother are
      unmistakably coloured ones, and give no indication of an even moderately recent loss. But it
      is so clear that Miss Le Marchant means to add no explanation that he has to change the
      subject.
"Though Bertie is not an old friend," he says, smiling, "yet I have come across one here
      to-day—she opened the door to me; I should have liked to shake hands with her, only she looked
      so haughty—she never used to look haughty at the Moat."
"Do you mean nurse?" she asks.
"Yes, I knew her in an instant; she is not in the least changed, less even"—hesitating a
      little, as if doubtful whether the stiffness of their new relations warranted a
      personality—"less even than you."
She snatches a hasty look at him, a look upon which he sees, to his surprise, imprinted a
      character of almost fear.
"You must be laughing at me," she says, in a voice in which he detects an undoubted tremor;
      "I am very much changed."
There is such obvious apprehension in her whole manner, that his one thought—after a first
      flash of astonishment—is to reassure her.
"Of course I was only speaking of externals," he says quickly; "ten years could hardly be
      expected to leave any of us quite where we were as to our inner selves;" then, seeing her
      still look flurried, and becoming himself nervous, he adds, rather stupidly, the hackneyed
      Swinburnian couplet—

"'Time turns the old days to derision,
Our loves into corpses or wives!'

though I never could see that that was quite a necessary alternative!"
Ere the words are out of his mouth she has risen with precipitation, and begun hurriedly to
      re-arrange the branches of lilac in a scaldino on the table near her. She is apparently so
      awkward about it that one odorous white bough falls out on the floor. Before Jim can stoop to
      pick it up, Byng has rushed to the rescue. In eagerly thanking him, in receiving it back from
      him, and accepting his services in replacing it among its perfumed brothers, the girl, perhaps
      involuntarily, turns her back upon her former interlocutor, who sits for a moment staring
      rather blankly at her, and wondering what sting there could have lurked in his apparently
      harmless words to drive her away so abruptly. Whatever may have driven her away, there is
      certainly no doubt as to her being gone. Nor as Jim sees her moving about the room, followed
      by Byng, and showing him her treasures—the little wild red and yellow tulips she plucked in
      the field this morning; the chicken-skin box she bought at Ciampolini's yesterday, and mixing
      all that she shows with her delicate light laughter—can he buoy himself up with any reasonable
      hope of her ever, with her own good will, returning. He must be looking more blank than he is
      conscious of, for Mrs. Le Marchant's voice sounds quite apologetic in his ears, when, having
      been, like himself, deserted by her companion, she takes a seat near him.
"Elizabeth is so proud of her bargains," she says, glancing with a lenient smile towards her
      daughter; "she must show them to everybody."
"She never offered to show them to me," replies Jim, rather morosely; then, becoming aware
      of the almost puerile jealousy evidenced by his last remark, he adds:
"I am afraid I said something that annoyed Miss Le Marchant; I cannot think what it could
      have been. I told her how wonderfully little changed I thought her in the last ten years; but
      it could not have been that, could it?"
The mother's eye is still following her child, and, if it were not an absurd assumption,
      Burgoyne could have fancied that there was a sudden moisture in it.
"She is very sensitive," Mrs. Le Marchant answers slowly; "perhaps it would be safer not to
      say anything about herself to her."
"Perhaps it would be safer," rejoins Jim, with some ill-humour, "if you were to draw up a
      list of subjects for me to avoid; I have no wish to play the part of bull in a china shop; and
      yet I seem to be always doing it; imprimis" (striking the forefinger of his left hand with the
      right), "imprimis the Moat."
He pauses, as if expecting a disclaimer, but none such comes—"The past generally" (moving on
      to the second finger and again halting; but with no more result than before). "Yourselves"
      (reaching the third finger). Still that silence, which, if it mean anything, must mean assent.
      He looks impatiently in her face, to seek the response which her lips refuse him.
"On your own showing," she says gently, though in a rather troubled voice, "you have the
      whole field of the present and the future left you; are not they wide enough for you?"
His brows draw together into a painful frown.
"Perhaps I have as little cause to be fond of them as you have of the past."
It is a random shot, a bow drawn at a venture; but it could not have hit more true
      apparently had it been levelled with the nicest aim.
As her daughter had done before her, Mrs. Le Marchant rises hastily, and leaves him—leaves
      him to reflect ironically upon how wisely Amelia had acted in insisting upon his visiting
      these "dear old friends," upon whom the effect of his conversation is so obviously
      exhilarating.
"I wish I had not come; I wish it was time to go home!"
The small fractious voice that wails the two preceding sentences seems to be Jim's own
      mouthpiece. It is, in point of fact, the voice of Bertie, who, tired of uttering his
      unregarded request for the repetition of the concert which had filled him with such delight,
      has of late been trying the effect of his unassisted powers to bring about the desired
      consummation, by putting his arms as far as he can round the dog's body, and endeavouring to
      lug him towards the music-stool. The collie has been enduring this treatment for five
      minutes—enduring it with an expression of magnanimous patience, which seems to say, that,
      though it is undoubtedly an unpleasant experience, yet, as it is inflicted upon him by one of
      his own family, he must of course put up with it, when Elizabeth goes to the rescue. Elizabeth
      goes alone, since Byng is held in converse by her mother at the other side of the room. Verbal
      persuasions having entirely failed, she tries to loosen the child's arms; but his grasp,
      though puny, is obstinate, and the only perceptible result of her endeavours is the utterance
      by her young friend of the two polite aspirations above recorded.
"He does not want to sing any more to-day," Jim hears her saying in her gentle voice; "you
      really are hurting him; he is too polite to say so; but you are squeezing him so tight that
      you really are hurting him. Why now" (with a little accent of pain), "you are hurting
       me."
Jim has been looking with a lack-lustre eye out of the open window at the young plane trees
      exchanging their frowsy buds for infant leaves; at the one Judas tree pranking in its purple
      blossoms in the Piazza; but at that low complaint he makes one step across the room, and,
      whipping off Master Bertie alike from long-enduring dog and plaintive woman, stoops over the
      latter as she sits upon the floor, passing one hand over the other, upon which the child's
      angry fingers, transferred from his first victim, have left rosy prints of pain.
"I wish I had not come; I wish it was time to go home!" whimpers the little boy.
"Since he is so anxious to go home, I will take him, if you like," says Jim in a stiff
      voice; "I must be going myself."
She looks up at him from her lowly posture, a charming, half-apologetic, wholly peace-making
      smile fleeting across her small face, while she still chafes her hand—that little pinched hand
      which makes him feel so ridiculously tender.
"Are you, too, sorry that you came?" she asks.
The question takes him by surprise. He is not prepared for so friendly and almost intimate a
      sequel to her short, shy answers, and her abrupt quitting of him. He hesitates how to answer
      it; and as he hesitates, she rises and stands beside him. It is not easy for a grown person to
      rise gracefully from a seat on the floor. Jim catches himself thinking with what a roll and a
      flounder Cecilia would have executed the same manœuvre; but Elizabeth, supple and light, rises
      as smoothly as an exhalation from a summer meadow.
"If I was rude to you just now," she says, rather tremulously; "if I am ever rude to you in
      the future, I hope you will understand—I hope you will put it down to the fact that I—I—am
      very ignorant of—that I know very little of the world."
The two men are gone; so is the child; so is the dog; and Elizabeth is shutting up the piano
      and removing the score.
"What a noise we made!" she says, smiling at the recollection.
"If you make such a shocking noise again, the signora and the other lodgers will infallibly
      interfere."
Mrs. Le Marchant has followed her daughter, and now throws one arm about her slight neck,
      with a gesture of passionate affection.
"If you knew," she says, in a voice of deep and happy agitation, "what it was to me to hear
      you laugh as you did to-day!"
"I have a good many arrears in that way to make up, have not I, mammy? And so have you too,"
      answers the younger woman, laying her sleek head down caressingly on her mother's shoulder;
      then, in a changed and restless voice: "Oh, if we could stop that man talking about the Moat!
      Why does he go on hammering about it?"
"Why indeed?" replies Mrs. Le Marchant with a shrug. "Men are so thick-skinned; but it is
      rather touching, his having remembered us all these years, is not it? For my part, I had
      almost entirely forgotten his existence—had not you?"
"Absolutely!" replies Elizabeth, with emphasis; "and if he will only let me, I am more than
      willing to forget it over again. Oh, mammy" (turning her face round, and burying it on her
      mother's breast), "why can't we forget everything? begin everything afresh from now—this
      delightful now?"
</div></body></text></TEI>