<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="41">
CHAPTER XI.

"I do remember an apothecary,—
And hereabouts he dwells."

Two days later she is called upon to perform the task she has undertaken. Probably she has
      spent those two days, and also the appertaining nights, in bracing her mind to it, for Jim can
      plainly see the marks of that struggle, though he is not aware of its existence, graved upon
      her face, on the third morning after the excursion to the Mole, when he comes in search of
      her. He does not find her in her accustomed corner of the terrace, but, looking down over the
      balustrade, sees her sitting below and alone on a small tree-shaded plateau that seems to have
      been levelled for lawn-tennis or bowls. Probably the giggling and chaffering of the girls on
      the terrace, and the respectful but persistent importunities of the Omars and Ahmeds to buy
      their colourful wares outspread on the hot flags have oppressed her spirits.
Fritz has carried down for her an arm-chair, a cane table, and a Persian rug for her feet,
      and she looks as if she were established for the day.
Since Byng has been out of danger Elizabeth has returned to her embroidery. She is one of
      those women to whom needlework is unaffectedly dear, like that other sweet woman "who was so
      delicate with her needle."
Before she catches sight of him he watches for a few moments her bright bent head and flying
      white fingers, and is able to perceive how many sighs she is sewing into the pattern.
"What a morning!" he says, running down the steps and joining her. "No one has any excuse
      for being an invalid to-day, has he?"
There is no second seat, so he stands beside her, looking up over her head at the tall trees
      above her, from which immense garlands of ivy are hanging and swinging in the warm breeze.
      That potent ivy has killed one tree altogether.
She glances up at him mutely, knowing that he has not come merely to tell her that the day
      is fine.
"We can hardly keep him on his sofa; he is virtually almost well, so well that he is quite
      up to seeing people. He would like—he has been asking—to see you."
He had thought her nearly as pale as it was possible for her to be when he had first come
      upon her. He now realizes how many degrees of colour she then had left to lose. While he
      speaks she has been mechanically pulling her thread through, and as he ceases, her lifted hand
      stops as if paralyzed, and remains holding her needle in the air.
It has come, then. For all her two days' bracing, is she ready for it?
"Now?"
The whisper in which this monosyllable is breathed is so stamped with a fear that borders on
      terror, that his one astonished thought is bow best to reassure her.
"Not if you do not feel inclined, of course—not unless you like. It can perfectly well be
      put off to another time. I can tell him—there will not be the least difficulty in making him
      understand—that you do not feel up to it this morning: that you would rather have more
      notice."
"But I would not," she says, standing up suddenly, and with trembling hands laying her work
      down upon the table, and beginning from dainty habit to pin it up in its protecting white
      cloth. "What good would more notice—a year's notice—do me?"
She turns away from him and fixes her unseeing eyes, glassy and dilated, upon a poplar tree
      that is hanging tasselled catkins out against the sky. Then once again she faces him, and he
      sees that there are cold beads of agony upon her forehead.
"Wish for me," she says huskily—"wish very hard for me, that I may get through it—that we
      may both get through it—alive!"
Then, motioning to him with her hand not to follow her, she walks quickly towards the
      hotel.
It is impossible to him to stay quiet. He wanders restlessly away, straying he knows not
      whither. The mimosas are out charmingly in the gardens, sending delicious whiffs of perfume
      from the soft yellow fluff of their flowers. The pinky almond-trees are out too, but not till
      long afterwards does he know it.
By-and-by he finds himself strolling, unhindered by a gardener placidly digging, through the
      grounds of a villa to let. Gigantic violets send their messages to his nostrils, the big and
      innumerable blue blossoms predominating over the leaves, which in England have to be so
      carefully searched for them. Superabundant oranges tumble about his feet; arum lilies, just
      discovering the white secret hid in their green sheaths, stand in tall rows on either side of
      him; a bed of broad beans points out the phenomenon of her February flowers to him. He sees
      and smells none of them. Have his senses stolen away with his heart into Byng's bedchamber?
      They must have done so, or he could not see with such extraordinary vividness the scene
      enacting there. He has himself helped to place it in such astonishing reality before himself.
      Does not he know the exact position of the chair she is to occupy? Did not he place it for her
      before he went to fetch her? Nor can his reason prevent his distorted fancy from presenting
      the interview as one between happy and confessed lovers. Even the recollection of her
      features, ghastly and with beads of agony dewing them, cannot correct the picture of his mind
      as he persistently sees it. That she meant, when he parted from her, to renounce Byng, he has
      no manner of doubt. But does not he know the pliancy of her nature? Is not he convinced that
      the rock on which her life has split is her inability ever to refuse anyone anything that they
      ask with sufficient urgency or with enough plausibility to persuade her that she can do them a
      kindness by yielding?
How much more, then, will she be incapable of resisting the importunate passion of her own
      heart's chosen one, freshly risen from a bed of death? Presently his restless feet carry him
      away out of the villa grounds again. He finds himself on the Boulevard Mustapha, and sits down
      on the low wall by the roadside, staring absently at a broken line of dusky stone-pines,
      cutting the ardent blue of the African sky on the hill opposite, and at an arcaded campagne
      throned high up among the verdure. He knows that it belongs to an Englishman who made reels of
      cotton, and the idle thought saunters across his mind how strange it is that reels of cotton
      should wind anyone into such a lofty white Eden! Can the interview be lasting all this while?
      Is not it yet ended? May not his tormented fancy see the chair by Byng's sofa once again empty
      or occupied by nurse or mother? Will not Mrs. Byng, will not Elizabeth herself; have seen the
      unfitness of taxing the sick man's faint powers by so extreme a strain upon them? But no
      sooner has this suggested idea shed a ray of light upon his darkness than an opposing one
      comes and blows it out. Has not Byng a will of his own? Will he be likely so soon to let her
      go? Nay, having once recovered her, will he ever let her out of his sight again? The thought
      restores him to restless action, and, although with sedulous slowness, he begins to retrace
      his steps towards the hotel. At a point about a quarter of a mile distant from it, the lane
      which leads to the Villa Wilson debouches into the road, and debouching also into the road he
      sees the figure of Cecilia, who, catching sight of him, as if unable to wait for him to join
      her, almost runs to meet him.
"I was coming to call upon you," says she eagerly. "Oh!"—with a laugh—"to-day I really
      cannot stay to think of the proprieties, and you have not been to see us for such
      centuries!"
"I have been nursing Byng."
"Oh yes; poor man! How dreadfully ill he must have been! I was so glad to hear he was
      better."
There is such a flat tepidity in the tone of these expressions of commiseration, something
      so different from the tender alertness of Cecilia's former interest in their object, that Jim,
      roused out of his own reflections to regard her more attentively than he has yet done, sees
      that she is preoccupied by some subject quite alien to the invalid.
"I have a piece of news to tell you"—with a sort of angry chuckle. "Such a piece of news! I
      am sure you will be delighted at it."
At her words a wonder as idle and slack as his late thought about the reels of cotton
      crosses him as to what possible piece of news to be told him by the buxom and excited person,
      before him could give him the faintest pleasure. That wonder sends up his eyebrows, and throws
      a mild animation into his voice.
"Indeed?"
"Do you like"—still chuckling—"to be told a piece of news or to guess it?"
"I like to be told it."
"Well, then"—with a dramatic pause—"we are going to have a wedding in the family!"
"My dear girl!" cries he, smiling very good-naturedly, and with a sensation that, though not
      violent, is the reverse of annoyance. "Hurrah! So he has come at last! Who is he? How dark you
      have kept him!"
Cecilia shakes her head and gives a short and rosy laugh.
"Oh, it is not I! You are wide of the mark."
"Your father?"—in a shocked voice.
He has a confused and illogical feeling that a second marriage on the part of Mr. Wilson
      would be a slight upon Amelia's memory.
"Father!"—with an accent that plainly shows him he is still further afield than in
      his first conjecture—"poor father! No, indeed; Heaven forbid! Fancy me with a stepmother!"
She pauses to give a shudder at the idea, while Jim gapes blankly at her, wondering whether
      she has gone off her head.
"Oh no; it is neither father nor I! No wonder you look mystified. It
      is—Sybilla!"
"Sybilla!!!!"
Although Mr. Burgoyne has not got it on his conscience that he has ever either expressed or
      felt anything but the most strenuous and entire disbelief in Sybilla's maladies, yet it has
      never occurred to him as possible that she should engage in any occupation nearer akin to the
      ordinary avocations of life than imbibing tonics through tubes and eating beef essences out of
      cups.
"She is going to marry Dr. Crump!" continues Cecilia, not on the whole dissatisfied with the
      effect of her torpedo. "When she told father, she said that he had saved her life, and that
      the least she could do was to dedicate the poor remainder of it to him. She tells other people
      that she is marrying him because we wish it! You know that that was always her way."
"Sybilla!!"
"I thought that there must be something in the wind, as since the beginning of the month she
      has never once wished us good-bye; and the housemaid upset the ink-bottle over the book of
      prescriptions without her ever finding it out; and the clinical thermometer has not appeared
      for a week!"
"Sybilla!!!"
"I thought I should surprise you; it gives one a disgust for the idea of marrying
      altogether, does not it? I have come to the conclusion that I do not care now if I never
      marry. Father and I get on quite happily together; and when one is well off, one can really be
      very fairly content in a single state; and, at all events, I am sure I do not envy
      Sybilla."
"Nor I Crump"—with an emphasis so intense that Cecilia bursts out into a laugh of a more
      genuine character than any she has yet indulged in.
"You will have to give her away!" she cries, as soon as she can again speak distinctly.
      "Father will marry her, of course, and you must give her away. I am sure she will insist upon
      it."
"She will have to make haste, then," returns he, recovering enough from his first
      stupefaction to join Cecilia in her mirth; "for I shall not be here much longer."
"You are not going away?"—raising her eyebrows, and with a tinge of meaningness in her tone
      which vaguely frets him.
"Why should not I go?" he asks irritably, his short and joyless merriment quite quenched.
      "What is there for a man to do here? I have stayed already much longer than I meant. I am
      engaged to meet a friend at Tunis—the man with whom I went to the Himalayas three years ago;
      we are going to make an excursion into the interior. I am only waiting for some guns and
      things. Why should not I go?"
"There is no earthly reason," replies she demurely; "only that I did not know you had any
      such intention. But then, to be sure, it is so long since I have seen you—not, I think,"
      glancing at him for confirmation of her statement rather too innocently, "since the lovers—ha!
      ha!—and I met you and Miss Le Marchant driving on the quay."
</div></body></text></TEI>