<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAPTER XVI.
"Tous les hommes se haïssent naturellement. Je mets en fait que s'ils savaient
       exactement ce qu'ils disent, les uns des autres, il n'y aurait pas quatre amis dans le
       monde."
Although Mrs. Byng always speaks of Miss Wilson as "Amelia," and is acquainted with every
      detail of that young lady's uneventful history—thanks to a long series of direct and
      interested questions, addressed through a considerable number of years, to her friend Jim, as
      to his betrothed—she has no personal acquaintance with the latter. She is so determined,
      however, to repair this omission, now that so highly favourable an opportunity is presented as
      their common stay in the same small city, that Jim is powerless to hinder her from arranging a
      joint expedition of the two parties—herself and her son on the one side, and Jim with his
      future wife and sister-in-law on the other, to Careggi, on the afternoon of the same day as he
      had witnessed her abortive attempt to add Elizabeth Le Marchant and her mother to the list of
      her acquaintances.
Amelia, is, for a wonder, free from home claims, Sybilla being more than usually bright, a
      kind friend having lately provided her with a number of the Lancet, containing a
      detailed account of an operation, which it seems not over-sanguine to expect she may herself
      be able to undergo. We all have our Blue Roses, and to "undergo operation," as she technically
      phrases it, is Sybilla Wilson's Blue Rose. Cecilia is likewise disengaged. The latter
      circumstance is matter for not unmixed rejoicing to Jim, Cecilia's future connection with
      himself being too close for him to relish the thought of her somewhat pronounced wooing of
      Byng being exposed in all its naïveté to the clear if good-humoured eyes of Byng's
      mother. But in this he wrongs Cecilia. The garden-party at the villa on Bellosguardo had
      proved to her that the fruit is hung too high for her fingers to reach, and that philosophy,
      which had enabled her genuinely to relish the wedding-cake of the man who had jilted her, now
      teaches her to lay to heart the sarcastic advice offered her by Jim, to look at the young man
      as poor women look at diamonds. Beyond one or two trifling gallantries, for which no one can
      judge her harshly, she leaves him alone, even though out of good-nature, and from inveterate
      force of habit, he gives her several openings to make love to him.
The day is one of even Italy's best, an air as soft as feathers, and full of April odours—a
      bright gay sun. The vines are rushing into leaf; they that ten days ago looked such hopeless
      sticks; little juicy leaves uncurling and spreading on each, and the mulberry trees, round
      which they twine, are rushing out too, at the triumphant call of the spring.
The party being of the unmanageable number five, has to be divided between two fiacres,
      whereof Mrs. Byng, in pursuance of her determination to know Amelia, insists upon occupying
      the first in tête-à-tête with Miss Wilson, while Cecilia and the two men fill the
      other. The latter makes but a silent load. Byng is, for him, out of spirits, and finding that
      Cecilia has virtually abandoned her suit, is glad to lapse into his own reflections. His
      example is followed by Jim, whose temper is ruffled by being again obliged to defer the quest
      he is still feverishly anxious to pursue, despite the shock of the morning's meeting at the
      Accademia.
They reach the villa, and leave their vehicles, glad to think that two of the perennially
      tired Florentine cab-horses will have a pause of rest, and, having shaken off a tiresome
      would-be laquais de place, desirous to embitter for them the sweet day and place,
      they stray at will through the garden among the clipped laurels, the cypresses, the gorgeous
      red rhododendrons, while beds of mignonette send forth such a steady wave of poignant
      sweetness as makes the sense ache with ecstasy of pleasure; and over the conservatory hangs a
      wistaria so old, so magnificent, with such a Niagara of giant flower bunches, as takes an
      English breath away. They go over the villa itself, pass through the room, and by the bed
      where Lorenzo, with the grotesque grim face, Lorenzo the Magnificent, gave his last sigh. It
      would make Death even more difficult to face than he is already, if one thought one should
      have to meet him under such a catafalque.
As they issue out again from the house's shadow into the sun-drenched garden, Mrs. Byng
      joins Burgoyne, who is walking a little apart.
"I like Amelia," she says confidentially, "such a nice pillowy sort of woman; not
      too clever, and oh, Jim, poor soul, how fond she is of you!"
It must always be pleasant to hear that the one absolutely good thing which this life has to
      offer is lavishly heaped upon us by the person with whom we are to pass that life; and perhaps
      pleasure is the emotion evidenced by the silent writhe with which Jim receives this piece of
      information.
"Not, of course, that she told me so in so many words," continues his friend, perceiving
      that her speech is received in a silence that may mean disapproval of any intrusion into the
      sanctuary of his affections; "but one can see with half an eye: poor Amelia, she beamed all
      over when I said one or two little civil things about you! She worships the very ground you
      tread on!"
He writhes again. "I hope that that is one of your figures of speech," he answers
      constrainedly.
The not unnatural result of the tone in which he utters this sentence, no less than the
      words themselves, is to quench the fire of Mrs. Byng's benevolent eulogies; and, as she cannot
      at once hit upon another topic, and is by no means sure that her countenance does not betray
      the rather snubbed dismay produced by the reception of her amenities, she is not sorry when
      Jim presently leaves her. Being, however, of a very sanguine disposition, and seeing him a
      little later sitting peacefully on a garden-seat beside his fiancée, she hopes that
      her words, though not very handsomely received at the time, may bear fruit later for Amelia's
      benefit. "And he always was very undemonstrative," she adds to herself consolatorily. "Nobody
      would have guessed that he was delighted to see me this morning; and yet, of course, he
      was."
The sun is growing visibly lower, and the Ave Maria comes ringing solemnly from the city.
      The seat to which Jim has somewhat remorsefully led his lady-love is a stone bench, shaded by
      a honeysuckle bower, close to a fountain. The fountain is not playing now; but round about it
      first a marten wheels, dipping in the water the end of her fleet wings; then a little bat
      prematurely flits, for it is still broad daylight. Broad indeed and bounteous is the daylight
      of Italy. Around them is the lush unmown grass; full of homely field-flowers, buttercups,
      catch-flies, daisies, ragged robins, while from some bush near by a nightingale is pouring out
      all the infinite variety of her ravishing song. She says so many different things that one
      never can feel sure that one has heard all that she has to say. Jim leans back listening, with
      his hands behind his head, steeped in a half-voluptuous sadness. He is oppressed by the
      thought of Amelia's great love. Is the nightingale's splendid eloquence really the voice of
      the poor dumb passion beside him, lent to Amelia to plead her cause? The high-flown poetry of
      the idea fills his heart with an imaginative yearning kindness towards her. He is in the act
      of turning to face her, with a more lover-like speech on his lips than has hovered there for
      years, when Amelia herself anticipates him.
"And to think that it is only April!" she says, with an air of prosaic astonishment. "Last
      April we had four inches of snow on the front drive. It was when Cecilia had the mumps."
"When Cecilia had the mumps?" repeats Burgoyne in a rather dazed voice. "I did not know that
      Cecilia had ever had the mumps."
This is the form into which are frozen the love-words that the nightingale and the perfume
      of the Tuscan flowers and the Ave Maria had so nearly brought to his tongue. Had Amelia known
      what an unwonted burst of tenderness her unlucky reminiscence had choked, she would have
      regretted it probably with a good deal deeper bitterness than would many a woman with a
      happier gift of utterance. But she is blessedly ignorant of what Cecilia's mumps have robbed
      her, and presently again strikes athwart the nightingale's song with the placid remark:
"I like your friend very much; I think that she is a very nice woman."
This time Burgoyne has no difficulty in responding immediately. Miss Wilson's first speech
      had so effectually chased his dreams that he can now reply with commonplace kindliness:
"She has just been button-holing me to make the same confidence about you."
"And she is so fond of you," continues Amelia.
He laughs.
"She has just confided to me that so are you;" then, with a hurried change of tone, in dread
      lest the last speech shall call out some expression of the mute pent passion always lurking in
      her patient eyes, he adds lightly, "I seem to be very generally beloved!"
What effect the flat fatuity, as it seems to Jim himself, of this last observation has upon
      Amelia, does not appear, since she receives it in silence; and again the Ave Maria and the
      bird divide between them the province of sound.
As the great sun droops, the honeysuckle above their heads seems to give out more generously
      its strong clean sweetness. The rest of the party have drifted away out of sight and hearing;
      but by-and-by their voices are again heard and their returning forms seen. As they draw near,
      it appears that their original number of three has been augmented by the addition of two men;
      and a still nearer approach reveals who the two men are. Mrs. Byng leads the way, talking
      animatedly to Mr. Greenock, who is evidently an old acquaintance. Byng trails after them by
      himself, and the rear is brought up by Cecilia and a portly clerically-dressed figure, whom
      Jim at once recognises as the Devonshire clergyman, his failure in obtaining information about
      whom has embittered and fidgeted his whole day. Here then is the opportunity he has sought
      brought to his very hand. And yet his first feeling, as he sees the complacent priestly face,
      and the deliberate black legs pacing beside Cecilia, is one of dismay. There is nothing
      unlikely in the supposition that he may have been presented to her at the garden-party at the
      Bellosguardo villa; and yet he now realizes with a shock of surprise that they are acquainted,
      and, if acquainted, then at liberty to converse upon whatever subject may best recommend
      itself to them. He is absolutely powerless to put any check upon their talk, and yet at this
      very moment he may be narrating to her that story which his own loyalty had forbidden him to
      overhear. The first couple has passed, so absorbed in eager question and answer that they do
      not even see Burgoyne and his betrothed. Mrs. Byng left London only three days ago, and Mr.
      Greenock might return thither at any moment that he chooses; and yet they are talking of it
      with a wistful fondness that might have beseemed Dante questioning some chance wayfarer to
      Ravenna as to the prosperity of his Florence. The second pair's voices are lower pitched, and
      their topics therefore less easy to ascertain; yet by Cecilia's gratified and even hopeful air
      they are evidently agreeable ones. But though agreeable, there is no evidence of their being,
      by their riveting ear and eye, of the nature he dreads. They also are so absorbed in each
      other as to have no attention to spare for the quiet silent persons sitting on the stone
      bench.
Amelia looks after them with a benevolent smile. Her sense of humour is neither keen nor
      quick, but there is a touch of very mild sarcasm in her voice, as she says, watching her
      sister's retreating figure:
"Cecilia has found a new friend, a clergyman again; do you know what his name is?"
"I believe it is Burton or Bruton, or something of the sort," replies Jim reluctantly,
      feeling as if even in admitting knowledge of the stranger's surname he were letting out a
      dangerous secret. "I should have thought that she had had enough of the Church," he adds with
      a very much more pronounced accent of satire than Miss Wilson's. "She has not taken my advice
      of sticking to the laity. Shall we—shall we follow them?"
This last suggestion is the result of a vague, uneasy feeling that, by keeping within
      earshot, he may exercise some check upon their conversation.
"Why should we?" replies Amelia, for once in her life running counter to a proposition of
      her lover's, and turning her meek eyes affectionately upon him; "we are so well here, are not
      we? and"—laughing—"we should spoil sport."
As Jim can allege no adequate reason for pursuing Cecilia and her latest spoil, he has
      unwillingly to acquiesce, and to content himself with following them with his eyes, to gain
      what reassurance he can from the expression of their backs. But the peaceful if melancholy
      restfulness that had marked the first part of his abode on the stone seat is gone, past
      recall. He moves his feet fidgetily on the gravel; he gets up, and throws pebbles into the
      fountain; he snubs an officious little Italian boy who brings Amelia a small handful of
      flowers plucked out of the emerald grass.
Amelia does not share her lover's uneasiness, as indeed why should she? She puts the
      expected tip into the young Tuscan's dirty brown hand, and leans her head enjoyingly on the
      back of the stone seat.
"I think I like to come to these sort of places with you even better than to
      picture-galleries," she says with an intonation of extreme content.
"Do you, dear?" replies he absently, with his uneasy eyes still searching the spot at which
      Cecilia and her escort had disappeared. "Of course you are quite right: 'God made the country,
      and man made the——' Ah!"
The substitution of this ejaculation for the noun which usually concludes the proverb is due
      to the fact of the couple he is interested in having come back into sight, retracing their
      steps, and again approaching. It is clear as they come near that the desire to explore the
      villa grounds has given way, in this case, to the absorption of conversation. With a pang of
      dread, Jim's sharpened faculties realize, before they are within earshot, that they have
      exchanged the light and banal civilities which had at first employed them for talk of
      a much more intimate and interesting character. Cecilia is generally but an indifferent
      listener, greatly preferring to take the lion's share in any dialogue; but now she is all
      silent attention, only putting in, now and again, a short eager question, while her companion
      is obviously narrating—narrating gravely, and yet with a marked relish. Narrating what? Jim
      tells himself angrily that there are more stories than one in the world; that there is no
      reason why, because Cecilia's clerical friend is relating to her something, it must
      necessarily be that particular something which he dreads so inexpressibly; but he strains his
      ears as they pass to catch a sentence which may relieve or confirm his apprehensions. He has
      not to strain them long. It is Cecilia who is speaking, and in her eagerness she has raised
      her voice.
"You may depend upon me; I assure you I am as safe as a church; if I had chosen I might have
      made a great deal of mischief in my day, but I never did. I always said that she had a
      history. I do not pretend to be a physiognomist, but I said so the first time I saw her. I
      knew that they came from Devonshire. I assure you I am as safe as a church!"
It is clear that the clergyman's hesitation, already perhaps more coy than real, is unable
      to withstand the earnestness of Cecilia's asseverations of her own trustworthiness. He has
      already opened his mouth to respond when an unexpected interruption arrests the stream of his
      eloquence. Jim has sprung from his bench, and thrust himself unceremoniously between the two
      interlocutors.
"Come and see the wistaria," he says, brusquely addressing the girl; "you were not with us
      when we were looking at it, were you? You were maintaining the other day that wistaria has no
      scent; come and smell it!"
It is in vain that Cecilia protests that she has already seen quite as much of the wistaria
      as she wishes; that she had never denied the potency of its perfume; that her legs are giving
      way beneath her from fatigue. Jim marches her relentlessly away, nor does he again quit her
      side until he sees her safely seated in the fiacre which is to carry her home. It is indeed
      his portion to have a tête-à-tête drive back to Florence with her, Byng having
      absently stepped into the vehicle which bears the other ladies. He draws a long breath as they
      jog slowly away from the villa, leaving the clergyman taking off his tall hat, with a baffled
      and offended air of farewell. He is conscious that Cecilia is swelling beside him with
      feelings no less wounded, even for some moments before she speaks.
"You rather cut your own throat," she says, in an affronted voice, "when you interrupted me
      and Mr. Burton so rudely; he was on the point of telling me something very interesting about
      your dear friends the Le Marchants; he knows all about them; he has known Elizabeth ever since
      she was a child."
Even across Jim's alarm and anxiety there comes a flash of indignation and distaste at the
      familiar employment of the name that even to himself he only pronounces on his heart's
      knees.
"Who is Elizabeth? Do you mean Miss Le Marchant?"
"Mr. Burton talked of her as 'Elizabeth,'" replies Cecilia, with a still more offended
      accent at the rebuke implied in his words; "one naturally would of a person whom one had known
      in short frocks."
"And he—he told you something very interesting about her?"
"No, he did not," returns Cecilia snappishly, "he had not the chance; he was just beginning
      when you rushed in like a bull in a china shop, and now"—in a key of excessive vexation—"I
      shall probably never have another chance of hearing, as he leaves Florence to-morrow."
Jim's heart gives a bound. "Leaves Florence to-morrow, does he?" he repeats eagerly.
"I do not know why you should seem so delighted to hear it," rejoins Cecilia, looking at him
      from under her smart hat with a mixture of surprise and resentment. "I do not see anything
      particularly exhilarating in losing an agreeable acquaintance almost as soon as one has made
      it!"
"Perhaps—perhaps it was a false alarm," says Jim, set, to some extent, on his guard by her
      evident astonishment at the keenness of his interest in the subject; "perhaps"—beginning to
      laugh—"he only said it to frighten you; why do you think that he is leaving Florence
      to-morrow?"
"Because he told me so," answers she impatiently; "he is at the Grande Bretagne, and he was
      complaining of not being comfortable there, and I was advising him to move to another hotel,
      and he said, 'Oh no, it was not worth while, as he was leaving Florence to-morrow.'"
Jim draws a long breath, and leans back in his corner of the fiacre. He has gained the
      information he sought. It has come to his hand at the very time he was chafing most at his
      inability to go in quest of it.
"So your interruption was the more provoking," continues Cecilia, her indignation puffing
      out and ruffling its feathers at the recollection of her wrongs, "as it was our last chance of
      meeting; however, you cut your own throat, as he evidently knew something very interesting
      about your dear friends; something which he does not generally tell people, and which he would
      not have told me only that he saw at once I was no blab."
Jim shivers. He had only just been in time then—only just in time to stop the mouth of this
      blatant backbiter in priest's raiment. His companion looks at him curiously.
"Are you cold," she asks, "or did a goose walk over your grave? Why did you shiver?"
He pulls himself together. "I was shivering," he says, compelling himself to assume the
      rallying tone in which he is apt to address the girl beside him, "at the thought of the peril
      I had saved you from. My poor Cis, have not you and I suffered enough already at the hands of
      the Church?"
She reddens. "Though I do not pretend to any great sensitiveness on the subject, I think you
      have worn that old joke nearly off its legs."
But during the rest of the drive she utters no further lament over her lost clergyman.
</div></body></text></TEI>