<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER IX.
"Was it 12, or 12 bis, Piazza d'Azeglio?"
There are no tears in Byng's eyes as he asks this question next morning—asks it of his
      friend, as the latter sits in the Fumoir, with an English paper in his hands, and a good cigar
      between his clean-shaven lips. It has struck him several times lately that he will have to
      give up good cigars, and take to a churchwarden pipe and shag instead. But, so far, the
      churchwarden and the shag remain in the future.
"12, or 12 bis, Piazza d'Azeglio?" inquires Byng.
"Was what 12 or 12 bis?" replies his friend, with a somewhat obviously intentional
      obtuseness; but Byng is far too thoroughly healthy and happy a young animal this morning to
      take offence easily.
"I mean Miss Le Marchant's address," he answers, explaining as amiably as if he had not been
      perfectly aware that it was only "cussedness" that had dictated the query.
There is a slight pause. Burgoyne would like to answer that he does not remember—would like
      still more to answer that he does not see what business it can be of Byng's; but, since he is
      not destitute of common-sense, a second's reflection shows him that he has no good reason for
      either the lie or the incivility, so he replies, pretty calmly, with his eyes still on his
      leading article:
"I believe Miss Le Marchant said 12 bis."
Having obtained the information he wanted, and finding his companion not conversationally
      disposed, Byng is moving away again, when he is arrested by Jim's voice, adding to the
      intelligence he has just given the monosyllable:
"Why?"
"Why what?" asks Byng, returning readily, and laughingly mimicking the intentional
      obtuseness so lately practised on himself by the other.
"Why did you ask?"
"I am thinking of paying my respects there this afternoon, and I did not want to ring at the
      wrong bell."
A short silence. Jim's head is partly hidden by his Galignani.
"Did Miss or Mrs. Le Marchant ask you to call?"
Byng laughs.
"Both of them are as innocent of it as the babe unborn!"
"You asked yourself then?" (in a snubbing voice).
Byng nods.
"And she said yes?"
The plural pronoun has dropped out of sight, but neither of them perceives it. The younger
      man shakes his sleek head. Jim lays down his paper with an air of decision.
"If she did not say 'Yes'—if she said 'No,'" he begins, with an accent of severity, "I fail
      to understand——"
"She did not say 'No,'" interrupts Byng, still half laughing, and yet reddening as well.
      "She began to say it; but I suppose that I looked so broken-hearted—I am sure I felt it—that
      she stopped."
As Jim makes no rejoinder, he continues by-and-by:
"After all, she can but send me away. One is always being sent away" (Jim wishes he could
      think this truer than he does); "but now and again one is not sent, and those are the times
      that pay for the others! I'll risk it."
There is a hopeful ring in his voice as he ends, and again a pause comes, broken a third
      time by the younger man.
"Come now, Jim"—looking with a straight and disarming good humour into his friend's overcast
      countenance—"speak up! Do you know of any cause or impediment why I should not?"
Thus handsomely and fairly appealed to, Burgoyne, who is by nature a just man, begins to put
      his conscience through her paces as to the real source of his dislike to the idea of his
      companion's taking advantage of that introduction which he himself has been the means—however
      unwillingly—of procuring for him. It is true that Byng's mother had adjured him, with tears in
      her eyes, to preserve her boy from undesirable acquaintances; but can he, Burgoyne, honestly
      say that he looks upon Elizabeth Le Marchant as an undesirable acquaintance for anyone? The
      result of his investigations is the discovery of how infinitesimal a share in his motives
      regard for his young friend's welfare has had. The discovery is no sooner made than he acts
      upon it.
"My dear boy," he says—and to his credit says it heartily—"I see no earthly reason why you
      should not go; you could not make nicer friends."
"Then why will not you come too?" asks Byng, with boyish generosity.
The other shakes his head. "They had much rather I stayed away; they have taken me en
       grippe."
"Pooh! Nonsense! You fancy it."
"I think not"—speaking slowly and thoughtfully—"I am not a fanciful person, nor apt to
      imagine that my acquaintances bother their heads about me one way or another; but when people
      try their best, in the first instance, to avoid recognising you at all, and on every
      subsequent occasion endeavour to disappear as soon as you come in sight, it is not a very
      forced assumption that they are not exactly greedy for your society."
This reasoning is so close that Byng is for the moment silenced; and it is the other who
      shortly resumes:
"I think it is because I remind them of the past; they have evidently some unpleasant
      association of ideas with that past. I wonder what it is."
The latter clause is addressed more to himself than to Byng.
"Perhaps some of them have died, or come to grief, and they are afraid of your asking after
      them," suggests the younger man.
"On the contrary—they are all—one more flourishing than another."
"Well, I would give them one more trial, anyhow; I am sure they would come round. Give them
      time, and I am sure they would come round!" cries Byng sanguinely; adding, "What could have
      been pleasanter than Mrs. Le Marchant's manner when you presented her to Miss Wilson?"
The mention of Miss Wilson recalls to Jim the extremely unpleasant moment of that
      presentation, thus brought back to him—the moment when Amelia had looked so middle-aged, and
      Cecilia so flashy; recalls to him also the conviction that has been growing upon him since
      yesterday, of the more than wisdom, the absolute imperative duty on his part, of avoiding a
      repetition of that comparison which had forced itself upon his notice in the church of San
      Miniato.
"You had better come," persists Byng still, like a magnanimous child, holding out half his
      cake to his friend; whether, like the same child, with a semi-hope that it may be refused, or
      whether, on the other hand, it may have crossed his mind that, where there are two visitees,
      the chances of a tête-à-tête are improved by there being also two visitors.
"My dear boy," returns Jim, this time with a testiness handsomely streaked with irony, "you
      are really too obliging; but, even if I wished it—which I do not—or even if they
      wished it—which they do not—it is in this case quite impossible, as I am engaged to
      go shopping with Amelia."
Probably the blow is not a knockdown one to Byng; at all events, he bears the rebuff with
      his habitual healthy good temper, and goes off to put on a smarter tie. Burgoyne, thinking no
      such improvement in his toilette necessary, strolls away to the Anglo-Américain. It is true
      that he has covenanted to escort Amelia to the shop for Cantagalli ware, though there is no
      particular reason why, had he so wished it, the purchase of the dinner-service that is to
      grace their Bayswater symposia might not have been deferred for twenty-four hours; and indeed,
      as things turn out, it has to be so deferred.
As he opens the door of the Wilson sitting-room his future father-in-law brushes past him,
      with evident signs of discomposure all over his clerical figure and spectacled face; and, on
      entering, he finds equal, if not superior, marks of upset equanimity on the countenances of
      the three women that are the room's occupants. Over the wood fire—Sybilla alternately roasts
      and freezes her family, and this is one of her roasting days—Cecilia is stooping, in evident
      search for some object that has been committed, or tried to be committed, to the flames. The
      other two are looking on with an air of vexed interest. Sybilla is the first to address
      him.
"You have appeared at a not very happy moment," she says, with a sigh; "we have been having
      a family breeze; it has sent my temperature up nicely! It is 100, 100, Point 2."
The mention of Sybilla's temperature is always enough to put Jim in a rage. It is therefore
      in no very feeling tone that he returns:
"If it were 1,000, Point 99, I should not be surprised, in this atmosphere! Good Heavens,
      Cis, are not you hot enough already?"
The young lady thus apostrophised rises, with some precipitation, and with a very heated
      complexion, from her knees, holding in her hand, however, the object of her quest—a rather
      charred small parcel, done up in white paper, and with a fragment of white ribbon still
      adhering here and there to it.
"Father behaves so childishly," she says, with irritated undutifulness.
"You must own that it was enough to provoke him," strikes in Amelia's mild voice.
"What was enough to provoke him? How has he shown his childishness? For Heaven's sake, some
      of you explain!" cries Jim impatiently, looking from one to the other.
But with this request none of the three appears in any hurry to comply. There is a distinct
      pause before Cecilia, seeing neither of her seniors shows any signs of relieving her of the
      burden of explanation, takes that burden upon herself.
"The fact is," she says, setting her little rescued packet on the table beside her, and
      beginning to fan herself, "that Mr. Dashwood, the man to whom I was engaged, has chosen to
      marry. I am sure"—with a shrug—"no one has the least desire to deny his perfect right to do
      so; and this morning there arrived by post a bit of his wedding-cake! I suppose he meant it
      civilly; but father chose to take it as an insult to himself, and though it was addressed to
      me, he threw it into the fire. I am very fond of wedding-cake; so, as soon as father's back
      was turned, I fished it out again!"
Jim laughs, with more vigour perhaps than heartfelt amusement.
"Bravo, Cis! You are a real philosopher! We might all learn a lesson from you."
"What have you done with your nice friend?" asked Sybilla languidly. "Amelia, dear, this
       couvre-pied is slipping off me again. What a sympathetic voice he has! I am sure he
      has been a great deal with sick people."
"I left him putting on his best tie to go out calling. No, calm yourself, Cecilia, not on
      you; it is not your turn to-day."
"Whose turn is it then?" asks the girl, with an interest not at all blunted by the
      mortifying incident of the cake, which, indeed, she has begun to nibble with apparent
      relish.
Jim hesitates a second—a second during which it strikes him with a shock that he already
      finds a difficulty in pronouncing Elizabeth Le Marchant's name. He manages to evade the
      necessity even now by a circumlocution.
"I believe it is the Piazza d'Azeglio upon which that luminary is to shine."
"Is he going to see that lovely creature to whom you introduced me yesterday?" cries Amelia,
      with good-natured enthusiasm. "I heard her telling him that she lived in the Piazza d'Azeglio.
      Oh, Jim, how pretty she is! One ought to pay for being allowed to look at her."
Many women, whose plainness is incontestable, are able to be just to their better favoured
      sisters; but Amelia is more than just—she is lavishly generous.
Burgoyne rewards her with an affectionate look—a look such as would make her swear that,
      beside Miss Le Marchant, as beside Dumain's fair love,

"Juno but an Ethiop were!"

"She looks as if she had had a history; that always improves a woman's appearance," says
      Cecilia pensively, holding a fragment of the fateful cake suspended in air, and regarding it
      with a melancholy eye. "Has she?"
"I never asked her."
"Why did not you go too?" inquires Amelia, judiciously striking in, as is her habit, as
      often as she perceives that her younger sister is beginning to get too obviously upon her own
       fiancé's nerves; a catastrophe which something in the tone of his last remark tells
      her—though she does not quite understand why it should—is imminent. "They are old friends of
      yours, are not they? They may be hurt if they find that a perfect stranger like Mr. Byng is in
      a greater hurry to visit them than you are."
Before Burgoyne's mental vision rises a picture of Elizabeth's heavenly eye wandering
      indifferently over the dear old friend's shoulder to find its home in that of the perfect
      stranger. But he says kindly, and even playfully:
"Why did not I go too? Because I was under the impression that I was engaged to go with
      another lovely being to choose crockery, was I not? Am I not?"
Amelia's answer is conveyed by a series of nods and winks executed behind her sisters'
      backs, which he presently understands to imply that she desires a private interview. It is not
      immediately that he grasps what she is driving at, since dumb-show is often puzzling to the
      person at whom it is aimed, though clear as day to the dumb-shower. As soon, however, as he
      masters what her wish is, he hastens to comply with it; and five minutes later finds them
       tête-à-tête in the hideous little dining-room which had been the scene of their
      reunion, and of many after-meetings.
"I could not say so, of course, before her," remarks Miss Wilson, as soon as they
      are out of earshot, "or she might have insisted upon my going. She is very unselfish
      sometimes; but the fact is, I do not think I ought to leave Sybilla again to-day. You see, she
      was alone the whole of yesterday afternoon; and when we came back we found her in a very low
      way. She had been reading her book of prescriptions—you know the book; all the prescriptions
      which she has had for the last ten years bound up together—and we rather dread her bringing it
      out, as she always fancies that she is going to have the disease prescribed for."
"Humph!"
"And, after all, happiness ought not to make one selfish, ought it?" says Amelia, with a
      gentle sigh of abnegation, as she ruffles her pale-haired head against his coat-sleeve. "I
      have so much of you now—oh, so much!—not to speak of——"
"Cecilia, of course, is incapacitated by grief?" interrupts Jim brusquely. "She will be
      going up and down upon the mountains like another unfortunate fair one. But your father? He
      will be at home, will he not?"
"Yes, he will be at home," replies Amelia, slowly and doubtfully, as if not finding a very
      satisfactory solution in this suggested arrangement; "but, as you know, it never answers to
      leave father and Sybilla alone together for long. You see, he does not believe that there is
      anything the matter with her; he thinks that she is as well as you or I" (a gush of warm
      feeling towards his father-in-law rushes over Jim's heart); "and though he tries to prevent
      himself from showing it to her, yet I am afraid, poor dear, that he is not very
      successful."
Jim laughs.
"And to-day," continues Amelia, "he is naturally a good deal upset about Cecilia and that
      wedding-cake; it was very impertinent to send it—was not it?—though she does not seem
      to see it. I hope"—with a wistful smile, and a repetition of the fond friction of her head
      against his sleeve—"that when you throw me over——"
This is a hypothesis, suggested with perhaps unwise frequency by poor Miss Wilson, which
      never fails to exasperate Jim.
"If we are going to talk nonsense," he breaks in brusquely, and with no attempt to return or
      reward her caressing gesture, "I may as well go."
"Go to the Piazza d'Azeglio," says she coaxingly, her spirits raised by the harshness of
      tone of his interruption of her speech, and half persuading herself that it owes its birth to
      the supposition being too painful to be faced by him.
He looks at her strangely for a moment, then—"Why do you wish me to go to the Piazza
      d'Azeglio?" he asks, in a tone that is no longer overtly cross, only constrained and odd. "Why
      are you driving me there?"
"Because I think you would like it," she answers; "because"—taking his hand and passing her
      lips, which he feels to be trembling a little, very gently over the back of it—"because all
      through your life I want you to have exactly what you like, always."
He draws his hand away; not unkindly, but as if shocked at the humility of her action.
"That is so likely," he says mournfully.
</div></body></text></TEI>