<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
CHAPTER XII.
"A merry going out bringeth often a mournful return home; and a joyful evening makes
       many times a sad morning."
The return drive, as it is quicker, being all downhill, so is it a more silent one than that
      to the villa had been. Byng, indeed, is as gaily willing to be fondled by Cecilia as he was on
      his way up; but there is a mixture of maidenly reserve and sub-tender reproach in her manner
      which makes their relations somewhat strained. The afternoon's pleasuring has had a jading
      effect upon Amelia's spirits, as, after having been sucked dry on the subject of Sybilla's
      maladies, and afterwards at once shaken off, by her female acquaintance, she has not been
      fortunate enough to meet with anyone else to exchange talk with, and has sat in disconsolate
      yet patient loneliness on a stone bench, afraid to stir from the spot where he had left her,
      lest she might miss her lover, of whom, however, she has unaccountably seen nothing, until
      when the Angelus is ringing, and the shadows spreading, he has come to give her curt notice,
      with half-averted face, that the fiacre is at the door. In point of fact, he has been too
      conscious of the disorder of his features to dare to expose them sooner than he can help to
      her fond scrutiny. He would give anything to be able to sit beside, instead of opposite to her
      during their drive home, as a profile is a much less tell-tale and more governable thing than
      a full face; and he is painfully conscious that as often as she imagines she can do it without
      being detected by him, she is stealing looks of inquiring anxiety at him. He tries to put her
      off the scent by spasmodic comments upon the entertainment that they have just quitted; and
      she does her best to keep up the ball of conversation, since she sees that it is his wish. But
      in vain. Each forced remark falls still-born, leading to nothing. It is Cecilia who at last
      succeeds in giving a fillip to the languid talk.
"I did not know that Mrs. Roche was a cousin of your beauty, Miss Le Marchant," she says
      suddenly, growing tired of her pensive attitude, and addressing herself to Jim.
He starts guiltily. "Did not you?"
He must look odd; for even Cecilia's large and preoccupied cow eyes rest upon him with an
      expression of surprise.
"I wonder why she was not there to-day."
It is not exactly a question, yet her great shallow orbs do not seem to be going to leave
      his face until he makes some response. He forces himself to do so.
"I understood Miss Le Marchant to say that they are not going out just now."
"And why are not they, pray?" inquires Cecilia, in an injured voice, as if the retirement
      from the world of the two ladies in question were a personal injury to herself; "they are not
      in mourning, all their gowns are coloured ones, and they do not look as if they had bad
      health—perhaps, however" (after a moment's thoughtful attempt to find a solution)—"perhaps,
      however, they may have something—one never knows—people have such unexpected diseases
      nowadays—hysteria, perhaps, or fits."
At this ingenious suggestion Jim is conscious of a writhing motion passing over the stalwart
      form of Byng beside him. In his own brain, if there is room for anything but the desire to
      evade Amelia's eyes, is a dim sense of relief at a suggestion so grotesquely wide of the mark
      as that made by the younger Miss Wilson. In perfect innocence of the effect produced upon her
      companions by her bright hypothesis, Cecilia goes on to remind her sister of the parallel case
      of a very handsome girl whom they had once reckoned among their acquaintance, and who was
      periodically being found by her family with her head under the fender. But Amelia rises but
      faintly to the reminiscence, and the remainder of the drive is accomplished in a general
      silence.
The next day is the one which had been fixed upon for the expedition to Certosa. It was only
      with a very large admixture of wormwood in his prospective pleasure that Jim had ever looked
      forward to this party, but now he anticipates it with absolute dread. How can he face
      Elizabeth and her mother, with that ominous phrase of the "screw loose" still ringing in his
      ears? He feels a traitor towards them, in that he has, however unwillingly, overheard it. To
      add to his mental uneasiness is the fact of his having as yet not broken to Amelia his
      intentions with regard to the disposal of his afternoon. Amelia's eyes have for years had the
      habit of covertly watching him to read his wishes almost before they rose; but in their gaze
      yesterday he had, unless misled by his guilty conscience, detected a new quality, a quality of
      alarm and enlightenment. He will get over the communication of his piece of news as early in
      the day as may be; so, having finished breakfast before Byng has put in his, as usual, tardy
      appearance, he takes his hasty way to the Anglo-Américain. He finds the family there in a more
      placid frame of mind than that which they had presented on one or two of his recent visits.
      Sybilla is expecting her doctor, on which occasions she always likes to have a more lacy
      coverlet than usual thrown over her languid feet; a greater efflorescence of pink ribbons
      about her thin throat, and a disposition of pots of lilies about her wan head. Amelia, active
      and long-suffering as usual, is moving about in patient execution of her vain and tiresome
      whimsies. Cecilia sits tranquilly in the window, knitting an elaborate pair of men's woollen
      gloves, not indeed—to do her justice—for anyone in particular, but with a wise forethought for
      the accidents and possibilities of life. Since, on this occasion, his sweetheart shows no
      inclination to draw him away into the dining-room for a tête-à-tête, Jim has to take
      the bull by the horns, and rush into his subject in a more public manner than he had intended.
      But the one desire to get it over outbalances all minor considerations.
"Amelia," he begins suddenly, and even to himself his voice sounds discourteous and abrupt,
      "shall you want me this afternoon?"
The moment that the words are out of his mouth it strikes him that the form into which he
      has thrown his question is more than necessarily untender. She stops in the patting of
      Sybilla's smart pillows, and perhaps there is something a little abrupt too in her
      monosyllabic "Why?"
"Because," standing before the fireplace, with his back to the three women, and throwing the
      words over his shoulder, "because, if you do not, Byng and I were thinking of going to
      Certosa."
There is a pause. He hears that Cecilia's needles have stopped clicking; her work has
      dropped into her lap. In another moment she will have proposed to come too. "With the Le
      Marchants," he goes on, shooting out the fateful words like bullets; "a partie
      carrée."
Still silence behind him. He cannot go on staring for ever at the billets of wood of the
      unlit fire. He has to turn round and face his companions. The only one of them whose pleasure
      or displeasure in his announcement he at all heeds—Amelia—is stooping over Sybilla,
      rearranging in a high, picturesque tier behind the invalid's long back, three cushions, and
      her face is almost entirely hidden from him by her attitude.
"Of course if it is in the least inconvenient, if you have made any other plans for me—if,
      in fact, you want me," he continues in a tone that is at once apologetic and dogged.
"But I do not," cries she, answering at last, and with a distinct laugh in her voice, a
      laugh into whose quality he is not anxious too curiously to inquire. "You must not be so
      conceited as to think that I always want you! In point of fact, you could not have hit upon a
      day that suited me better. I am really rather 'throng' to-day, as they say in Yorkshire. I
      have quite a hundred things to do, and father wants me to help him to correct the proofs of
      his sermon, the sermon he preached at Mr. Moffat's church on the Holy Innocents' Day. He has
      been asked to publish it—is not that flattering? Poor father, I believe he will end by being a
      popular preacher—in fact" (laughing again), "the whole family is going up in the world!"
There is such a forced mirth in her tone that Jim feels much more guiltily uncomfortable
      than if she had treated him to hysterics or sulks. Nor does his satisfaction with himself
      increase, when, upon his rising to depart, she runs out of the room after him, to say to him,
      while her homely face twitches against her will, how much she hopes that he will enjoy
      himself; how perfectly happy she shall be without him; and how eagerly she shall look forward
      to hearing all about it from him to-morrow. "It will be almost better than going to Certosa
      herself," she ends.
But against the unnatural altitude of this last flight of abnegation nature revolts, and,
      becoming conscious of a break in her voice, she hastily retreats and gets back into the
       salon, in time to see Cecilia shaking her elaborate head, and to hear her remarking
      with slow emphasis, "Mark my words! There is something odd about those people, and it is not
      hysteria!"
With spirits sensibly worsened by his interview, Burgoyne returns to the Minerva, and,
      mounting to Byng's bedroom, finds that young gentleman stretched upon his bed, gloom in his
      usually jocund eye, and an open letter lying on the floor beside him. But Jim is far too
      preoccupied to notice anybody's gloom but his own.
"I came to ask at what hour we are to set off this afternoon?" he says with a sort of flat
      moroseness in his tone.
"We, indeed!" rejoins the other with a groan, and rolling over with a sort of
      petulance on the bed, dishevelling the neatly-smoothed pillow by burrowing his ruffled head in
      it—"we!"
There is such a heart-rent woe in the accent with which the last monosyllable is pronounced
      that for a moment Burgoyne has no other idea but that his young friend, too, has become aware
      of the "screw loose," has heard, perhaps in detail, that story from before whose ominous
      opening he himself had fled. The thought sends his heart into his throat, so as to render him
      incapable of asking an explanation of the other's affliction.
"We!" repeats Byng for the third time, and very indistinctly, as he is now lying entirely on
      his face.
"Why do you go on saying 'we' in that idiotic way?" asks Jim at last, recovering
      his voice—recovering it only to employ it in imitating the younger man's accents, in a manner
      which displays more exasperation than natural talent for mimicry. It is not a politely-worded
      inquiry, but it has the desired result of acting as a tonic on him at whom it is aimed, making
      him not only roll over once again, but actually sit up.
"Why do I say we?" repeats he, his young eyes looking lamentably out from under the
      fall of his tumbled hair—"because it is not we! it is you! You lucky dog,
      you will have her all to yourself!"
Jim heaves an inaudible sigh of relief. Whatever may be the cause of his companion's
      enigmatical conduct, it is evidently not what he had feared. There is, however, no evidence of
      relief or any other mild quality in his next remark.
"If you would talk less like an ass, I should have a better chance of knowing what you are
      driving at!"
The query seems only to renew and deepen the other's tribulation. He falls back into his
      former attitude.
"You will hold the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand!" he groans. "No, do not go" (with a
      sudden and startling change of tone, springing off the bed, as he becomes aware that his
      friend is making for the door, unable to bear those rhapsodies, whose full distastefulness to
      their hearer the utterer little conjectures). "I'll tell you! I'll explain. Why are you in
      such a deuce of a hurry? I cannot go to Certosa because I have just heard from my mother that
      she is to arrive to-day. She will be here in another hour."
Jim's fingers are already on the door handle, but this piece of news arrests him.
"Your mother? I did not know that she was coming abroad."
"No more did I!"
"It must have been a very sudden thought!"
"Very!"
"What a delightful surprise for you!"
"Delightful!" There is so ludicrous a discrepancy between the adjective and the accent with
      which it is rendered that Jim bursts into a bitter laugh.
"She would be flattered if she could see your elation at the prospect of meeting her!"
Byng's blood rushes up under his clear smooth skin at his friend's jeer, but he answers,
      with some dignity:
"I do not think you have any right to imply that I am not always glad to see my mother; I do
      not deny that, if it had been equally convenient to her, I had rather she should have come
      twenty-four hours later."
Jim feels ashamed of himself, though, being an Anglo-Saxon, he has far too much false shame
      to confess it directly, and what he means for an amende, when it comes, is of an
      oblique nature.
"I think far the best plan will be to put off the excursion altogether; I am sure that I am
      not particularly keen about it."
The indignant red has rapidly died out of Byng's face; his placability being only to be
      surpassed by his slowness to take offence.
"Is it possible?" he asks in a tone of stupefaction; then, with a sudden tardy recollection
      of the rosy fetters in which his friend is held by another lady, he adds—"But, of course, you
      are not—I was forgetting!"
Jim winces.
"As it is your party, you had better send up a note at once to the Piazza d'Azeglio."
"No, do not let us both throw them over!" cries Byng eagerly. "Heaven knows it was hard
      enough to persuade them to accept in the first instance. If you go we shall at all events keep
      our communications open; and you—you will say something to her for me?"
"What kind of something?" inquires the older man carpingly. "Am I to tell her only what a
      fine fellow you are in general, or anything more circumstantial?"
"Tell her——" begins Byng in a rapt voice; but apparently the sight of his companion, who has
      somewhat ostentatiously pulled out a note-book and pencil, and assumed the patient air of one
      about to write to dictation, dries the stream of his young eloquence; "tell
       her—nothing."

"'Nothing speaks our grief like to speak nothing!'"

replies Jim, leaving the room with this quotation on his lips, rather hastily, for fear lest
      the other should change his mind.
</div></body></text></TEI>