<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="39">
CHAPTER IX.
There are few things more trying to an active-minded person than to sit occupationless,
      vaguely waiting. At first, it is true, the keenness of Jim's alarm prevents his feeling the
      ennui which would be the natural result of his situation. Poignantly anxious questions succeed
      each other in his mind. Has he had any right to permit the interview at all? How far is Byng
      accountable for his actions? What chance is there that his already rocking reason will stand
      the shock of a meeting which, even in his sanest moments, would have so wildly excited him?
      And if not, what may be the consequences? Grisly headings of newspaper paragraphs write
      themselves in the air before him—"Homicidal Mania," "Murder and Suicide."
The details of a tragic story which, illustrated by sensational woodcuts, he had idly read a
      day or two ago in a venerable Police News, left lying on the smoking-room table,
      recur to his memory. It was a tale of a groom who, in an access of jealous madness, had shot a
      scullion sweetheart through the head, and then blown his own brains out. The tale had made but
      little impression on him at the time—unhappily, it is scarcely possible to take up a journal
      without the eye alighting upon some such—but it comes back to him now with terrifying
      vividness. What security is there that such tragedies may be confined to grooms and
      kitchen-maids? How does he know that Byng has not a revolver hidden in his breast-pocket? How
      can he tell that he is not at this very moment drawing it out? He (Jim) ought to have made
      sure, before exposing her to such a peril, that the danger was minimized by Byng's being
      weaponless. Is it too late to make sure of that even now?
He takes one step towards the salon door, then hastily retraces it. Pooh! he is
      growing as mad as Byng. They will come out and find him eavesdropping.
He retreats to the table, which is at the greatest distance allowed by the room's narrow
      enceinte from the scene of the drama whose dénouement he is expecting, and, sitting
      down, takes up a book. It happens to be Elizabeth's Italian exercise-book, and the sight of it
      conjures up before his memory her forlorn figure stooping disconsolately over the page,
      wrapped in her brown furs, as he had seen it on that rainy night that seems now so distant. He
      had pitied her for being lonely then. Well, whatever else she may be, she is not lonely
      now.
He catches his breath. It is quite a quarter of an hour since he began his watch. How quiet
      they are! There is a murmur of voices, but there is nothing that in the least indicates
      violence. Before his eyes there flashes in grotesque recollection the hideous picture in the
       Police News which illustrates the high words with which the catastrophe of the groom
      and kitchenmaid had been heralded. He has been making a mountain out of a mole-hill; has been
      exaggerating his friend's emotional temperament, naturally further heightened by sleeplessness
      and want of food, into incipient insanity. If he were mad, or at all tending that way, would
      he be talking in the low rational key which he obviously must be? It is evident that her
      presence, her eye, her—yes, what more likely?—her touch have soothed and conjured away what of
      excessive or perilous there was in his emotion.
They have been together half an hour now. All danger is certainly over. Why should he any
      longer continue his officious and needless watch?—superfluously spying upon them?
Relieved as to what he had thought his worst fear, and yet with an uncommon bitterness about
      his heart, he turns to withdraw, and his hand is already on the lock of the door which leads
      into the corridor, when suddenly, without any warning, there reaches his ear the noise of a
      loud, crashing fall, followed—accompanied, rather—by a piercing scream.
In infinitely less than a second he finds himself on his knees beside the prostrate body of
      Byng, who, with blood pouring from his forehead, is stretched upon the floor of the
       salon. Even at this second there flashes upon him, ludicrous and dreadful, the
      memory of the Police News. This scene has a grotesque likeness to the final one of
      the groom and kitchenmaid series, only that in the present case the heroine, instead of
      staggering backward with the top of her head flying up to the ceiling, is hanging unharmed
      over her fallen lover.
"Are you hurt?" cries Jim in frantic anxiety, looking at her across the prostrate figure,
      and unable to eradicate from his mind the revolver idea. "Did he hit you? I did not hear a
      shot."
"Oh no, no! but he," fetching her breath in terrible gasps, and hanging over the bleeding
      man with that utter abandonment of all disguise, in which a great naked grief sweeps away our
      sophistications—"he is dead!"
"Oh no, he is not," answers Jim hastily, tearing open Byng's waistcoat and laying his hand
      upon his heart. "He has only fainted. Get some water! Have you got any salts? No; do not lift
      his head"—seeing that she is agonizedly trying to raise his prone head and rest it upon her
      knees—"he had better be as flat as he can. Quick, some water!"
She does not need to be twice told. In an instant she has sprung to the table, and brought
      thence the china jug out of which she is wont to water her flowers, and also the big cut-glass
      bottle of smelling-salts with which Jim has often seen poor Mrs. Le Marchant solacing herself
      when racked with that neuralgic headache which means worry. He splashes water out of the one
      upon Byng's ashy face, and holds the other to his pale nostrils; while Elizabeth, once more
      flinging herself upon her knees, wipes the blood from his temples with her little useless
      gossamer inch of handkerchief.
"How did it happen?" asks Jim rapidly. "What did he do to himself?"
The heads of the two ministrants are very close to each other as they bend together over the
      swooned youth. Jim can see a little smear of Byng's blood upon one of her white cheeks. The
      sight gives him a shudder. Byng seems to have made her more his own by that gory baptism than
      by all his frenzied vows and tears.
"Oh, I do not know," she answers, still fetching both breath and words with difficulty. "He
      was standing up, and he seemed quite right; and then, all of a sudden, in a minute, he went
      down like a log, and hit his forehead against the sharp corner of the table"—with a convulsive
      shiver at the recollection. "I ought to have saved him! I ought; but I was not quick enough. I
      stood stock-still, and now he is dead! You say that he is not; but I am sure he is dead!"
"Oh no, nonsense! he is not," replies Jim brusquely, thinking a certain harshness of manner
      the best recipe for her. "He is alive, sure enough; and as for the cut on his forehead, now
      that you have wiped the blood away, you can see for yourself that it is not at all a deep one.
      It is merely a big scratch. I have often had a worse out hunting from a bramble, in jumping
      through a hedge. Oh, Mrs. Le Marchant, here you are! That is all right. We have had an
      accident, you see. He has fallen down in a faint, and given himself a bit of a knock. That is
      all; do not be frightened. It looks worse than it is—Oh, M. Cipriani, vous voilà! Envoyez
      chercher un médecin tout de suite! Il y a un M. Crump"—catching in his destitution at the
      thought of even Sybilla's objectionable friend.
But hereupon half a dozen voices—for by this time even more than that number of inmates of
      the hotel have thronged into the little room—raise themselves to pronounce another name—the
      name of one who both stands higher in medical fame and is more quickly procurable. In search
      of him Zameth, the porter, is instantly despatched, and meanwhile about the inanimate body
      sympathizers stand three deep, until reluctantly dispersed by a hint of a nature so broad as
      not to be misunderstood from Jim, to the effect that the patient would have a better chance of
      coming to himself if he were allowed to have a breath of air. By the time the doctor
      arrives—there is some small delay before he appears—all are got rid of, and, Mrs. Le Marchant
      having gone to give directions for having Jim's room arranged for the sick man, both because
      it is on the ground-floor and also of a better size than that allotted to him, Jim and
      Elizabeth are once again left tête-à-tête.
Once again they kneel on either side of the prone figure. How dreadfully dead and how
      extravagantly long it looks! Once again he sees that blood-smear on her face. It is just above
      her one dimple, and stands out in ghastly incongruity over that little pitfall for love and
      laughter. How passionately he wishes that he might ask her to go and wash it off! If he did
      she would not hear him. She has no ears left, no eyes, no sense, save for that livid face,
      splashed with the water which has not brought him back to life, and with the red drops still
      slowly trickling from the wound on his brow, and which have stained here and there the damp
      tendrils of his hair—for that livid face and for the flaccid hands, which she rubs between her
      own with an ever more terrified energy, as he still gives no sign of returning
      consciousness.
By-and-by he is taken out of her custody. She is robbed even of the wretched satisfaction of
      chafing his poor senseless fingers. On the arrival of the doctor he is carried off, and laid
      upon the bed that has been made ready for him. She follows them miserably as they bear him
      staggeringly across the hall—a powerfully-built young man of over six feet high, in the
      perfect inertness of syncope, is no light weight—and looks hungrily over the threshold of the
      bedroom; but when she attempts to cross it Jim puts her gently back.
"No, dear, no!" he says. (He is almost sure afterwards that for that once in his life he
      calls her "dear.") "You had better not. We think he is coming round, and if you are the first
      person he sees when he comes to himself it might be bad for him—might hurt him. You would not
      hurt him, would you?"
"No, I would not hurt him," she answers slowly. And so turns in her utter tractableness, and
      goes away meekly without a word.
It is evening again now, almost the same hour at which Jim and Elizabeth were beheading
      photographs twenty-four hours ago. Twenty-four hours! It feels more like twenty-four years.
      This is what he says to himself as he once again opens the door of the Le Marchants'
      apartment. It is the first time during the whole day, except to snatch a couple of mouthfuls
      of food, that he has left Byng's side; and it is only due to the fact that Mrs. Le Marchant is
      supplying his place, and has sent him on a message to her daughter, that he has quitted his
      post. He knows that she has meant to do him a kindness in despatching him upon this errand;
      but he is not sure that it is one.
Elizabeth is not in the salon, but the screen that masks the door separating that
      room from the little alcove beyond is folded back. Over the doorway is a hanging of Eastern
      embroidery—as to the meaning of the strange gold scrolls that look like Arab letters on whose
      red ground Elizabeth and he have often idly speculated. He pushes it aside, and sees her
      standing with her back towards him, the flimsy muslin window-curtains drawn back as she looks
      out on the night. The alcove is on ordinary occasions scarcely ever occupied, and there is
      something uneasy and uncomfortable that matches the wretchedness of her other circumstances in
      finding her standing there alone and idle.
The elements have long finished their raging, and fallen to boisterous play. It has been a
      fine day, and though the sun has long laid down his sceptre, he has passed it on with scarcely
      diminished, though altered, radiance to his white imitator. It is broad moonlight—startlingly
      broad. The moon hangs overhead, with never a cloud-kerchief about her great disk. The winds
      that, loudly sporting, are up and abroad have chased every vapour from the sky, which is full
      of throbbing white stars. Before he reaches her side she has heard him, and turned to meet
      him, with a mixed hunger and pitiful hope in her wan face. She thinks that he has come to
      fetch her. He must kill that poor hope, and the quicklier the more mercifully.
"Mrs. Le Marchant sent me. I came to tell you that he has recovered consciousness. You see,
      you were wrong"-with an attempt at a reassuring smile—"he is not dead, after all. He is
      conscious; that is to say, he is not insensible; but I am afraid he is not quite himself yet,
      and you must not—must not mind—must not be frightened, I mean—if he begins to shout out and
      talk nonsense by-and-by: the doctor says it is what we must expect."
"And may I—mayn't I—will not you let me?"
What a quivering voice the hope has, and yet how alive it is! However clumsily, and with
      whatever bitter yearnings over the pain he is causing her, he must knock it on the head at
      once.
"Go to him?—impossible! quite out of the question! The great object is to keep him perfectly
      quiet, and if once he caught sight of you—"
"But if he is not himself," interrupts she, with a pathetic pertinacity, "he would not know
      me. I could not do him any harm if he did not know me, and I might do something—oh, ever such
      a little thing for him! If you knew what it was to stand here and do nothing—do
       nothing indeed!"—with a change of tone to one of agonized self-reproach;—"have not I
      done enough already? Oh, would anyone have believed that it would be I that should kill
      him!"
She turns back to the window again, and dashes her forehead with violence against the frame.
      Outside the tall date-palm is shaken through all its plumes by the loud breeze; it is swaying
      and waving and blowing, and not less is its solid shadow cut out by the moonshine's keen knife
      on the terrace, wavering and shaking too, as if convulsed by laughter. The porch of the
      hotel—mere whitewash and plaster, as memory and reason tell one that it is—stands out in
      glorified ivory like the portals of such a palace as we see in vision, when

"Good dreams possess our fancy."

"I can't have you talking such nonsense," says Jim, in an exceedingly kind and not very
      steady voice, for his own feelings are horribly harrowed; and on thinking over the scene
      afterwards, he cannot swear that, at this point, he did not pass a most brotherly arm for one
      moment round the poor little heaving shoulder, which is shaking almost as much as the
      palm-tree's shadow. "He is not going to die; he is not thinking of dying. Nobody has killed
      him—least of all you."
She makes him no answer, nor lifts her stricken head, over which he looks out, while the
      ghostly mirth shakes the landscape; at his wits' end, in search of consolation. Below waves a
      sea of foliage, out of which the strong elfin light has stolen all the colour. From that
      colourless dark ocean rises far away to the right the dazzling little snowy dome of a mosque,
      showing like a transfigured mushroom; and down below the rounding bay is seen laying its
      foam-lips in white glory on the land.
"Dr. Stephens feels sure that he must have had a sunstroke. You know that he has been in the
      East. He was a month in Cairo; the sun has great power there, even in winter, and he is sure
      to have exposed himself recklessly. He was on his way home—had got as far as Paris, it
      seems—when he accidentally heard that you were here. Since then, no doubt, he has neither
      eaten nor slept; so you see how little you are to blame. You know that I told you how odd he
      was before you even saw him. Do not you remember?"—trying to recall every circumstance that
      may tend to reassure her—"I warned you that you would have to be careful what you said to
      him?"
His words have a very different effect from that intended by him.
"Oh, that is why I cannot forgive myself!" says she, with what sounds almost like a cry of
      physical pain. "You did warn me; I had no excuse. In his state I ought never—it was
      murdering him to tell him—"
She breaks off. To tell him what? Jim bites his lips hard to hinder himself from putting
      this question, as he again, in mercy to her, looks away from her out into the night.
The moon has swum over the housetop by now; but one can see her handiwork as plainly as ever
      in the broad argent fringe, like the border of a cloak, that marks where the waves are
      breaking on the beach.
One often talks of a fringe without really meaning that there is much likeness to one; but
      to-night the moon-washed breakers really do wear that aspect—a fringe of silver with long
      silver tags and ends.
"But I was so deceived," she continues, with that wail still in her voice; "he was not
      violent. After what you had told me, I expected him to be violent; but he was not: he was
      quite gentle and quiet, and he did beg so hard, and I was so glad to see him again, that I
      felt I was giving in—that I should give way altogether if I did not tell him—tell him at once,
      without giving myself time to think; and so I did"—growing very breathless and incoherent—"and
      in a second; and then all in a minute, without any warning, just as if I had shot him through
      the head, he went down with a crash. I did not see it, for I was not looking at him. I could
      not bear to look at him while I told him. I had both hands over my face, and then—and then—I
      heard him fall."
What can Jim say to her? Fear lest any dastardly unchivalrous curiosity may seem to pierce
      through whatever sympathetic question he might put to her keeps him dumb, and stupidly staring
      at the bowing, ironically merry palm.
"And now," she goes on, lifting her face, and he is shocked to see how livid it is in the
      moonlight, "he will go out of the world thinking me much worse than I really am, for I had not
      time to tell him all. He heard only the bare fact; he did not hear what excuse I had—that I
      was not really so wicked as—as—he will die thinking me."
The sob with which she ends alarms him by its kinship to a convulsion.
"I do not know what to say to you," he says, desperately making a snatch at her two hands,
      as if by the violence of his grip he could convey to her some little portion of the deep
      compassion that is swelling up in his heart for her; "I am so much in the dark. No, no, no!"
      with a return of that terror lest this ejaculation should seem the outcome of any
      inquisitiveness; "I do not want you to tell me anything! What is more, I will not listen to
      you if you attempt it; but what there is not the least manner of doubt about is that his
      fainting had no sort of reference to what you said to him: he would have fainted whatever you
      had said to him, or if you had said nothing at all. He was as mad as a hatter when he went in
      to you. It is all part of the same thing—over-fatigue, sunstroke. But he is not going to
      die"—with a hurried trip back to his former strain of consolation—"he is not thinking of it; I
      promise you, I give you my word of honour"—becoming perfectly reckless and completely
      insensate—"that he shall not!"
But she is too strangled with sobs to make any rejoinder.
"He shall have the best of nursing," goes on Jim. "I have telegraphed for a nurse to Nice.
      How astonishing it is that in a place of this size you cannot get a decent sick-nurse! I hoped
      we might have caught the one who nursed General Smith before——"
He stops abruptly, with a too tardy recollection that the allusion is not a happy once,
      since the General died two days ago. Unfortunately, she also remembers, as is evidenced by the
      strong shudder that passes over her.
"If he dies, will he be buried in that deep narrow, red grave that they showed us in the
      Protestant cemetery, and which they said that they always kept open for English visitors? If
      he dies! if he dies! Oh, if I could but have told him! if he would but have waited for me to
      tell him how it really was!"
</div></body></text></TEI>