<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="18">
CHAPTER XVIII.

"Ihr Blumen alle, Heraus! Heraus!"

It was to German flowers that the above hest was addressed. If they obey it, with how much
      more alacrity do the Italian ones comply with its glad command. It is a week later, and now no
      one can say that "the spring comes slowly up this way." Vines, figs, and mulberries, all are
      emulously racing out, and the corn has added two emerald inches to its juicy blades. The young
      plane-trees in the Piazza d'Azeglio, so skimpily robed when first Jim had rung the
       entresol bell of No. 12, are exchanging their "unhandsome thrift" for an apparel of
      plenteous green, and a wonderful Paulownia is beginning to hold up her clusters of gloccinia
      bells.
Jim has watched the daily progress of the plane-leaves from the low window of No. 12's
       entresol. The daily progress? Is it possible that he has been there every day during
      the past week? He asks himself this, with a species of shock; and it is with a sense of relief
      that he finds that one whole day has intervened, during which he had not heard the sound of
      the electric bell thrilling through the apartment under the touch of his own fingers. What can
      have taken him there, every day but one? He runs over, in his mind, with a misgiving as to
      their insufficiency, the reasons of his visit. For the first he had had an excellent excuse.
      Surely it would have been barbarous not to have imparted to the anxiously-watching pair the
      good news that the object of their mysterious terror had really and authentically gone! On the
      second day it seemed quite worth while to take the walk, in order to tell them that he had
      accidentally learned the clergyman's destination to be Venice, and his intention to return
       viâ Milan and the St. Gothard. On the third day, being as near to them as San
      Annunziata, it had seemed unfriendly not to inquire after Mrs. Le Marchant's neuralgia. On the
      fourth——He is pulled up short in his reminiscences. Why had he gone on the fourth day? He can
      give no answer to the question, and slides off from it to another. Which was the fourth day?
      Was it—yes, it was the one on which the wind blew as coldly east as it might have done across
      Salisbury Plain's naked expanse, and he had found Elizabeth sitting on a milking-stool
      shivering over a poor little fire of green wood, and blowing it with a pair of bellows. He had
      helped her to blow, and between them they had blown the fire entirely away, as often happens
      in the case of unskilled handlers of bellows, and Elizabeth had laughed till she cried.
And meanwhile, how many times has he been within the portals of the Anglo-Américain? With
      all his arithmetic he cannot make it more than twice. This neglect of his betrothed, however,
      is not of quite so monstrous a cast as at the first blush it may appear. It is she herself
      who, true to her life-long principle of shielding him from all disagreeable experiences, has
      forbidden him her door. He can aid her neither to bandage her father's swollen foot in the
      severe gout-fit under which he is groaning, nor to allay Sybilla's mysterious sufferings,
      which always display a marked increase in acuteness whenever any other member of the family
      shows a disposition to set up claims as an invalid. Cecilia, indeed, is ready enough to give
      her help in nursing her father, but she has on former occasions shown such an unhappy aptitude
      for tumbling over his swathed and extended leg, and upsetting his physic all over him, that
      she is received with such objurgations as his cloth will permit, so often as she shows her
      short nose within his sick-room. Only twice in a whole week. Can Amelia have wished to be
      taken quite so literally when she had bidden him stay away? There is only one answer possible
      to this question, and he shows his consciousness of it by at once raising himself out of the
      chair in which he is sunk, and turning his steps hastily towards her.
It is morning. The east wind is clean gone, and the streets are full of the scent of the
      innumerable lilies of the valley, of which everybody's hands are full. He stops a minute and
      buys a great sheaf for a miraculously small sum, from one of the unnumbered sellers. It shall
      make his peace for him, if indeed it needs making, which it has never done yet. He almost
      smiles at the absurdity of the suggestion. He finds Cecilia alone in the sitting-room, Cecilia
      sitting by the window reading the Queen. Upon her large pink face there is a puzzled
      expression, which is perhaps to be accounted for by the fact that the portion of the journal
      which she is perusing is that entitled "Etiquette," and under it are the answers to last
      week's questions, upon nice points of social law, which, if you do not happen to have read the
      questions, have undoubtedly an enigmatical air, as in the following instances: "Your husband
      takes the Baronet's daughter, and you follow with the Prince."—"We do not understand your
      question—babies never dine out," etc.
Upon Jim's entrance Cecilia lays down her paper, and at once offers to go in search of her
      sister, with whom she shortly returns. He had been quite right. There is no peace to make.
      Amelia greets him with her usual patient and perfectly unrancorous smile, but his second
      glance at her tells him that she is looking old and fagged. It is only in very early youth
      that vigils and worries and self-denials do not write their names upon the skin.
"How—how pale you are!" he says. If he had given utterance to the word that hovered on his
      lips, he would have cried, "how yellow!"
"It would be very odd if she did not," says Cecilia with a shrug, looking up from her
      "Etiquette," to which she has returned; "she has sat up three nights with father, and last
      evening Sybilla bid us all good-bye. You know she never can bear anybody else to be ill, and
      when father has the gout she bids us all good-bye—and Amelia is always taken in and sheds
      torrents of tears—do not you, Amelia?"
Amelia has subsided rather wearily into a chair. "She really thinks that she is dying," says
      she apologetically—"and who knows? some day perhaps it may come true."
"Not it," rejoins her sister, with an exasperated sniff "she will see us all out—will not
      she, Jim?"
"I have not the remotest doubt of it," replies he heartily; and then his conscience-struck
      eyes revert to his betrothed's wan face, all the plainer for its wanness. "No sleep, no fresh
      air," in an injured tone, checking off the items on his fingers.
"But I have had fresh air," smiling at him with pale affection; "one day Mrs. Byng took me
      out for a drive. Mrs. Byng has been very kind to me."
She does not lay the faintest invidious accent on the name, as if contrasting it with
      another whose owner had been so far less kind; it is his own guilty heart that supplies the
      emphasis. His only resource is an anger which—so curiously perverse is human nature—is not
      even feigned.
"You can go out driving with Mrs. Byng then, though you could not spare time to come out
      with me," he says in a surly voice.
She does not defend herself but her lower lip trembles.
"Come out with me now," he cries, remorse giving a harshness even to the tone of the
      sincerely-meant invitation. "You look like a geranium in a cellar; it is a divine day, a day
      to make the old feel young, and the young immortal; come out and stay out with me all day. I
      will take you wherever you like. I will——"
The genuine eagerness of his proposal has tinged her sickly-coloured cheek with a healthier
      hue for the moment, but she shakes her head.
"I could not leave father this morning; he will not take his medicine from anyone else, and
      he likes me to sit with him while he eats his arrowroot."
The only sign of approval of this instance of filial piety given by Jim is that he rises and
      begins to stamp irritably about the room.
"He is really not at all exacting," continues Amelia in anxious deprecation; "he was quite
      pleased just now when I told him that Mrs. Byng was going to take me to a party at the Villa
      Schiavone this afternoon. He said——"
"Mrs. Byng! Mrs. Byng again!"
This is not what Mr. Wilson said, but is the expression of the unjust wrath which Burgoyne,
      feeling it much pleasanter to be angry with someone else than himself is artificially and not
      unsuccessfully fostering. Again Amelia's lip quivers.
"I thought," she says gently, "if—if you have no other engagement this afternoon; if—if you
      are free——"
Nothing can be milder than the form which this suggestion takes, and yet there is something
      in its shape that provokes him.
"Free!" he interrupts tartly, "of course I am free! Have I a gouty father and a hysteric
      sister? Why should not I be free?"
"I am very glad to hear it," rejoins she—the light that his first proposal to take her out
      had brought into her face growing brighter and more established—"because in that case there is
      nothing to prevent your meeting us at the villa, and——"
"And seeing you and Mrs. Byng walking about with your arms round each other's necks, like a
      couple of schoolgirls," cries he, with a sort of spurious grumpiness.
"I can't think why you should object to Amelia walking about with her arm round
       Mrs. Byng's neck," says Cecilia, whose attention to her "Etiquette" is apparently
      not so absorbing but that she has some to spare for the conversation going on in her
      neighbourhood.
They all laugh a little; and harmony being restored, and Jim graciously vouchsafing to
      forgive Amelia for having ignored her for a sennight, she returns to her patient, and he to
      his hotel, where he is at once, contrary to his wish, pounced upon by Byng.
For some reason, which he would be puzzled to explain to himself, he has for the last week
      rather avoided his friend's company—a task rendered easier by the disposition manifested by
      the young man's mother to monopolize him, a disposition to which Burgoyne has felt no
      inclination to run counter. It is without enthusiasm that he receives Byng's expressions of
      pleasure in their accidental meeting.
"I have been searching for you, high and low."
"Have you?"
"Where have you been?"
"I have been to the Anglo-Américain"—with a flash of inward self-congratulation at this
      query having been put to-day, instead of yesterday, or the day before. The other looks
      disappointed.
"To the Anglo-Américain? I thought—I hoped; have you—seen them lately?"
Burgoyne has ceased to feign lack of understanding to whom the personal pronoun refers, and
      he answers with as much carelessness as at a moment's notice he can put on: "Why, yes, I have,
      once or twice."
"Do they—do not they think it strange of me not to have been near them all this time?"
"They may do"—dryly.
"They did not say so?"
"They did not; perhaps"—sarcastically—"the subject was too acutely painful for them to
      allude to."
Frequently as he has exposed himself to them, his Mentor's sneers never fail to send the
      crimson racing into Byng's face, and it finds its way there now. It does not, however, prevent
      his proceeding, after a confused moment or two, with his anxious catechism.
"She—she has not referred to the subject?"
"What subject?"
"To—to me?"
"She has never mentioned your name. Stay"—his veracity winning a reluctant victory over his
      ill-nature—"one day she said that you were sunshiny, and that she liked sunshine."
As he speaks he looks down at his boots, too unaffectedly annoyed at the justification of
      Elizabeth's epithet which its retailing has worked on Byng's countenance to be able to
      contemplate him with any decent patience. But there is enough evidence in the boy's voice of
      the effect wrought upon him by Miss Le Marchant's adjective to make his comrade repent very
      heartily of having repeated it.
"I should have been over," says Byng in a low eager way, "every day, every hour, as often as
      they would have received me, only that I could not leave my mother; and she—she has taken them
       en grippe!"
"En grippe? Your mother?" repeats Jim, too honestly and disagreeably startled by
      this piece of news to be able any longer to maintain his ironical manner; "why?"
The other shrugs his shoulders dispiritedly.
"I have not an idea; it cannot be because they did not seem to wish to be introduced to her
      at the Accademia the other day; she is quite incapable of such pettiness, and she admired
       HER so tremendously at first, did not she? You heard her; but since then she has
      taken it into her head that there is something—I cannot bear even to say it"—dashing his hat
      and gloves vehemently upon the table—"something louche, as she calls it, about her.
      Mother thinks that she—she—she"—sinking his voice to an indistinct half-whisper—"has—has gone
      off the rails some time or other. Can you conceive?"—raising his tone again to one of the
      acutest pain and indignation—"that anyone—any human being could look in her face and harbour
      such a notion for a single instant?"
He stares with eyes ablaze with wrathful pity at his friend's face, expecting an answering
      outbreak to his own; but none such comes. Burgoyne only says, in a not much more assured key
      than that which the young man had employed:
"How—how can such an idea have got into your mother's head?"
"I do not know, but it is there; and what I wanted you, what I have been searching
      everywhere for you for, is to ask you to—to set her right, at once, without any delay. It is
      unbearable that she should go on thinking such things, and nothing could be easier for you,
      who know them so well, who know all about them!"
Burgoyne is at first too much stupefied by this appeal, and by the impossibility of
      answering it in a satisfactory manner, to make any response at all; but at length:
"Know all about them?" he says, in a voice whose surface impatience hides a much profounder
      feeling. "Who dares ever say that he knows all about any other living soul? How many times
      must I tell you that, until we met at Genoa, I had not set eyes on Miss Le Marchant for ten
      good years?"
At the tone of this speech, so widely different from the eager acceptance of the suggested
      task which he had expected, Byng's face takes on a crestfallen, almost frightened look.
"But when you knew them," he says, "in Devonshire, they—they were all right then, were not
      they? they were well thought of?—there was nothing against them?"
"Good Heavens—no!" replies Jim heartily, thankful that the appeal is now so worded as to
      enable him to give a warm testimony in favour of his poor friends. "There was not a family in
      all the neighbourhood that stood so high. Everybody loved them; everybody had a good word for
      them."
Byng's countenance clears a little.
"And there is no reason—you have no reason for supposing anything different now?"
Jim stirs uneasily in his chair. Can he truthfully give the same convinced affirmative to
      this question as to the last? It is a second or two before he answers it at all.
"The facts of life are enough for me; I do not trouble myself with its suppositions."
He gets up and walks towards the door as he speaks, resolved to bring to an end this to him
      intolerable catechism.
"But you must have an opinion—you must think," cries the other's voice, persistently
      pursuing him. He turns at bay, with the door-handle in his hand, his eyes lightening.
"I asked her permission to bring Amelia to see her," he says, in a low moved voice; "if I
      had thought as ill of her as your mother does, do you think I should have done that?"
</div></body></text></TEI>