<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alas!, by Rhoda
      Broughton.</title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1890</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="43">
CHAPTER XIII.

"The pity of it, Iago! The pity of it!"

The Byngs are gone, having got off just within the time first suggested by the sick man's
      mother. But, after all, he has to be carried on board the Eugène Perrère. Since his
      interview with Miss Le Marchant, his progress towards recovery has scarcely been so smooth or
      so fast as before; and perhaps his mother is right to bear him away with what seems such
      overhaste, even though it be on men's shoulders that he has to make his exit. At all events,
      he is gone. The hotel—of which a part of the inmates have seen him only prostrate and
      bleeding, and the other and larger part have not seen him at all, but have had their curiosity
      whetted by the tale of his calamitous arrival, only to have it balked by his hurried
      departure—crowd into the entrance-hall, some on one pretext, some on another, most on no
      pretext at all, to see him go. There are only two of the visitors whose faces cannot be seen
      among the good-naturedly curious and sympathetically pitiful group that watch the exodus of
      the little party. Who shall say how those two spend the hour of Byng's departure out of their
      lives? Jim has accompanied the invalid to the quay to see the last of him; has stayed with him
      till the final bell warns non-passengers off the boat; has left him with all the proper
      requests and adjurations to let him know how the sick man bears the voyage; how they get on,
      etc. But as Mrs. Byng stands on the upper deck and watches the trail of churned water
      lengthening between her and the dwindling high white town, she has a feeling that her old
      friend does not like her as well as he did, and that it will never again be quite the same
      thing between them.
The Byngs are gone—have been gone a fortnight—and March is here. Over the villa faces the
      begonias have broken into riotous flower, and the snowy-blossomed fruit-trees, that have put
      on their snowy garments but lately, stand out in bright fragility against the heavy green that
      never, even in January, ceases to wrap itself about the lovely Moslem town.
Every day for the last fortnight, Jim, too, has been going, but he is not yet gone. His guns
      have arrived ten days ago, and his friend has expressed by post and wire his weariness of
      exploring the bazaars of Tunis alone. But he is not yet gone to join that impatient friend.
      Why does he still linger in a place where, as he had justly explained to Cecilia, there is
      nothing for him to do? Why indeed? It is a question that, by night and day, by the insolence
      of the staring moonlight which slides in upon his restless open eyes by night, under the fires
      of the great spring sun at noon, he asks himself. All the answer he can give is that it would
      be hardly friendly to choose this moment, when she is so down in the world, to leave
      Elizabeth.
She is down in the world; there can be no mistake about that. Even her father, who has
      returned from his wanderings, must be aware of this fact. Perhaps that is the reason why he no
      longer snubs her as much as he did; why he even accepts, with some semblance of graciousness,
      those affectionate and watchful ministrations which she tenders him with as gentle an
      assiduity as in her brighter days. But he has still no great appetite for her society; and
      she, unresentfully divining it, gives up to him, without repining, the one great solace of her
      melancholy—her mother's company. If Jim were gone, the more part of her life would be spent
      alone. She tells him so—tells him, with a sweet flattering smile, how much his comradeship is
      to her. Has he any right to rob her of that last prop? It is only to himself that the
      breathless clamberings up the steep short cut to El Biar, deep and brambly as her own
      Devonshire lanes, that the gazings in common over the pigeon-necked sea and the amaranth
      hills, can do any harm. They may put a sting into his own after-life—a sting that all the
      empty years that follow may be powerless to extract; but to her they serve only as a narcotic
      to numb the intensity of that ache which the cured madness of Byng has left behind it. Some
      day, of course, he must leave her; he cannot pass his whole life at her side; some day soon
      leave her to walk and sit and study her Italian Grammar forlornly alone. But it must not be
      until she has a little plucked up her spirits.
As soon as he sees any signs of this occurring, he will quit Algiers—quit it comfortably,
      with the consciousness of having done a good-natured thing, by which nobody is the worse. This
      is the compromise at which he arrives with the inward adviser—conscience, common-sense, what
      you will—that is hourly admonishing him to be gone. Does Elizabeth guess that her retention of
      the companion, to whom she so desolately clings, hangs on her remaining always as crushed as
      the first ten days after those cruel interviews with the Byngs, mother and son, had left her?
      If she did, she would probably seek to check the first faint revivings of cheerfulness in her
      inveterately gay spirit. Instead, while her heart is yet at its sickest, she earnestly tries
      to foster the tiny seeds of cheerfulness, saying to herself that it is mere selfishness in her
      to inflict her dismalness upon her one friend; seeking rather to lift his spirits, which seem
      scarcely less drooping than her own.
Does he enter into her motive? Does not it rather strike him with a species of shock how
      superficial must be the nature, how on the surface the suffering, of one who can already begin
      again to take a mischievous interest in the Widow Wadman's amours, and to mimic afresh the
      Cockney twang of the French Vicomte's English governess?
It is three weeks to-day since the Byngs left. The weather is fine, and a hot sunbeam is
      lighting up the painful indecision of Jim's face, as he stands in his bedroom with an open
      telegram in his hand, which two hours ago was put into it. It is from his friend at Tunis, and
      is conceived in terms which demonstrate that the indignation of the sender has got the better
      of his economy. It contains a stringent representation of his inability any longer to dance
      attendance upon Burgoyne's whims, and a peremptory request, answer paid, to be at once
      informed either that he will join him immediately, or that the idea of their joint excursion
      has been entirely abandoned. He is standing holding the paper in miserable uncertainty, torn
      by doubts, rent in twain by conflicting emotions, when the noise of voices and laughter
      outside the house draws him to the window.
The room he has occupied since he vacated his own for Byng looks out over the hall-door, and
      in front of that door a small group is gathered—the Vicomte, his two boys, his girl, her
      governess, a coal-black negro who serves as kitchenmaid to the establishment, and—Elizabeth.
      They are all gathered round a tiny donkey, such a bourriquot as the valiant Tartarin
      slew, which has evidently been brought up for sale by its Arab master. Attached to its head
      gear are two long reins, and holding these reins is Miss Le Marchant. As Jim looks out, the
       bourriquot, taking some strange freak into its little brown head, sets off galloping
      at a prodigious rate; and Elizabeth—white gown and blonde hair flying—gallops after it. As she
      is dragged at racing pace down the drive, her immoderate laughter comes borne back on the wind
      to the spectator of whom she is unconscious.
The latter has turned away from the window, and sat down to his writing-table, where he is
      scribbling a hasty answer to the missive which has cost him such long deliberation. It does
      not take a minute to pen now that he has once made up his mind, nor can it be more than five
      from the moment of the donkey's start to that when the telegram is on its way to the Post
      Office in Zameth the porter's hand. The die is cast. When this is the case after long
      irresolution, there must always be a sense of relief, and perhaps, therefore, it is relief
      which Jim's face, thrown down upon his arms rested on the table, expresses. Since no one can
      see that hidden face, it is impossible to say. He has certainly no wish that Elizabeth should
      be unhappy. Her patient white misery had filled him with tender pity and ruth; and yet her
      laugh, sweet and delicate as it was with all its excess of merriment, rings jarringly in his
      ears. She is incapable of a great constancy. He had promised himself to stay with her until
      her spirits were restored. Well, he has kept his promise handsomely. He has done with her and
      her contradictions now. It will be someone else's turn with her next. Whose? The Vicomte's,
      perhaps.
By-and-by he rouses himself. Only a part of his task is yet done. He must tell them that he
      is going. As he passes the looking-glass, he sees that his hair is roughened and erected by
      his late attitude. He passes a brush hastily over it. He must not look a Bedlamite like Byng.
      He finds Mr. and Mrs. Le Marchant sitting under the ficus-tree on the terrace—the terrace
      which, at this hour, they have to themselves. She is reading aloud to him paragraphs out of
      the Algerian paper, translating as she goes along, since his French is about on a par with
      that of most Englishmen of his standing.
He is leaning back in a wicker chair, with an expression of placid good-humour on his face.
      Across his knees the hotel cat—a plain and ill-natured animal—lies, loudly purring, while he
      obligingly scratches her judiciously whenever she indicates a wish for that relaxation. As
      Burgoyne remembers, Mr. Le Marchant had always been on very friendly terms with the beasts of
      the field and the fowls of the air. About the little group there is such an air of content, of
      harmony, of completeness in itself, that none can connect the idea of a third person with it
      in anything but an interloping attitude. And yet there is a third person whose presence must
      be continually infringing its happy duality, since niche of her own in life has she none.
"Are you looking for Elizabeth?" asks Elizabeth's mother, laying down her paper as the
      new-comer draws near; "she has walked to Biermandreis."
The intimate friendliness of her smile as she gives him this bit of information—the matter
      of course taking for granted that he must be seeking her whose society he has so wholly
      monopolized of late—plants a new sting in Jim's sore heart, and robs him for the moment of the
      power to make his announcement.
"She has not been gone more than ten minutes"—still with that bright look of kindly
      confidence that she is answering his thoughts.
"I am looking for you all," he answers abruptly. "I came to tell you that I am off
      to-morrow."
The shaft is sped. Though he is not looking at Mrs. Le Marchant, he knows that her face has
      fallen. Upon Mr. Le Marchant's, on the contrary, an added shade of cheerfulness is visible.
      Mr. Le Marchant has ceased any overt opposition to the young man's intimacy with his family;
      but none the less is the young man aware that the father has acquiesced but grudgingly in the
      footing on which he had found Jim on his return from his tour.
"I have had a wire from my friend in Tunis; he is becoming dangerous"—laughing, oh, how
      forcedly!
"You are going to Tunis?" says Mr. Le Marchant, almost cordially. "You are quite right; it
      is a very interesting place. One does really see the genuine East there, not the mongrel
      hotch-potch one has here."
"Is not it rather late for a trip into the interior?" asks the wife. The geniality has gone
      out of her tone, and the sunshine out of her face. There is a touch of involuntary wistfulness
      in both.
"The interior? Oh yes, of course. My dawdling"—more laughter—"has knocked that on the head.
      I have let the time for that go by. We intend to run over to Spain and see the Alhambra and
      the Escurial."
There is a general silence. Well, it is done. Neither husband nor wife makes any effort to
      alter his resolution or detain him. They do not even put any questions to him as to his future
      projects. He has nothing to do but remove himself and allow them to resume that happy little
      duet which he had disturbed.
"The train sets off at such an unearthly hour to-morrow morning—six o'clock or thereabouts;
      it would take three days to get there if it did not—that I must put my things together this
      afternoon. I shall see you again, of course, before I go."
"Oh, of course," replies Mr. Le Marchant, in the easy and comfortable tone of one to whom it
      is a matter of supreme indifference whether or not that farewell meeting ever takes place, and
      Mrs. Le Marchant says nothing at all.
He has adduced his necessary packings as an excuse for leaving them; though, indeed, they
      neither wished for nor asked any excuse; yet nothing is further from his intentions than to
      enter at once upon that occupation. She has walked to Biermandreis. In five minutes he is
      walking thither too. There are a couple of roads that lead there, and of course he takes the
      wrong one—the same, that is, that she had taken, so that, although he walks fast, yet, thanks
      to her start of him, he has reached the pretty little flower-shaded French village which, with
      its white church and its École Communale, looks as if it were taken to pieces at night and put
      to bed in a toy-box—he has reached it, and has, moreover, traced half his homeward way, before
      he overtakes her. The path by which he returns is a rough Arab track, cut in low steps up the
      hill, each step a mass of fossil-shells—whelk, and scallop and oyster shells, whose
      inhabitants died—strange thought!—before Adam saw Eden's fair light. It is a charming road,
      cut, in part, through the red rock, over which the southern greenery tumbles. He has
      approached quite close to her before she sees him. She is sitting on a camp-stool by the
      wayside, looking vacantly before her. Her figure is rather stooped, and her straight back
      bent, as if it were not worth the trouble to hold it up. Beside her, on the ground, lie a
      little tin colour-box and water-bottle and a drawing-board. He wishes, with a new pang, that
      he had not come upon her so suddenly. He is afraid that this is one of the aspects of her that
      will stick most pertinaciously in his memory. Catching sight of him, her whole sad, listless
      face lights up.
"It is you! I was sure you would come. I told them to tell you where I had gone. I meant to
      sketch"—with a glance at her neglected implements—"but"—with a sigh—"as you see, I did
      not."
"Are you down on your luck?" he asks, sitting down by her side; "you did not seem so"—trying
      to harden his heart by forcing a recollection of her extravagant gaiety—"a little while ago,
      when you were prancing after that jackass."
"Is not he a darling?" cries she, hurrying up the end of her sigh to make room for a smile
      of pleasure. "I want to buy him; only I am afraid he might die of sea-sickness going
      home."
"Perhaps"—scarcely knowing what he is saying.
"I should like to buy a little cart to harness him to—such a one as I saw just now going
      along the road, drawn by a tiny bourriquot that might have been twin brother to mine.
      Some Arab children had dressed out both him and his cart with branches of that great yellow
      fennel—his long ears and his little nose peeped out so pathetically between; another child
      walked after barefoot, waving a great acanthus-leaf. You never saw anything so pretty! Yes,
      you must break mine in for me," smiling again; "it will not take more than a week, I am
      sure."
"If it did not take more than a day even, I am afraid I should have to decline the
      appointment"—seizing this opening to blurt out his news. "I am off at six o'clock to-morrow
      morning. I—I want to see the Escurial."
She had been almost garrulous about the little donkey, and he had wished to stop her. In
      that he has undoubtedly succeeded.
How the asphodels cover the banks on either hand! They have come into full flower since last
      he passed this way: tall branching stem, white blossom, and pinky bud; here they are in
      thousands.
It is a soft day, on which scents lie heavy, and their strong odour—that is scarcely
      perfume, and yet has an odd, acrid charm—fills the air.
"Everything must come to an end," he says baldly.
She is apparently not going to make any more effort to detain him than had her mother. He
      has every right to come and go where and when he pleases. Since Amelia died, to no human being
      is he accountable for his actions, and yet there is both guilt and misery in his voice as he
      utters his platitude.
"It has been great good luck for me that you have stayed so long; I know that it is out of
      pure kindness that you have done it, and it has made all the difference to me. I—I am quite
      set up again now, thanks to you; and—and summer is coming on, and I shall do very
      well—capitally!"
She has detected—what is, indeed, pretty obvious—the deep distress of his face and voice,
      and, in her habitual unselfishness, her one thought is to relieve him of any self-reproachful
      misgiving that he is doing aught cruel in robbing her of the support of his companionship. In
      her tone is nothing but the meekest gratitude. It is her misfortune, not her fault, that in it
      there is not cheerfulness too. But her "gentle physic," instead of curing, seems to aggravate
      his ill.
"It must come to an end some time or other!" he murmurs wretchedly, as if to himself.
"Yes!"
Dead silence.
Below the slight eminence where they sit, the road winds white, and upon the opulent low
      green hills on its further side, what a banquet of colour! On one steep slope the plough is
      driving its difficult furrows, turning up the rich red earth, shaded with deeper claret and
      lighter pink stains.
Beneath, a square of stone-pines looks like a green velvet handkerchief spread on the
      hillside, and over the rest of the upland eucalyptus, and olive, and cactus hold their riot of
      various verdure; while, on the tiptop of everything, against a weirdly pale-blue sky-field, a
      Moorish villa lifts its white flank.
How long have they both been staring dully at that fair prospect before Elizabeth again
      speaks!—
"You were a very good friend to me!"
She had not meant that past tense as an arrow to shoot into his heart; but it sticks there,
      barbed.
"I do not know how."
"And friends—real, good friends—should not have concealments from each other, should they?
      They should tell one another about themselves?"
"Yes."
A pause.
"I have often wished—often tried to tell you about myself; but I could not. I never could! I
      can tell you to-day if you wish, if you care to hear. Do you care?"
"Do I care?"
What a small battlefield those three words make for the anger and agony they express to
      fight upon!
Another longer pause.
She has taken off her hat, and now passes her handkerchief over her damp forehead.
"I shall be all right when I have once begun, but it is bad to make a start."
"Do not make it! do not tell me! I adjure you not to tell me! it hurts you too much!"
"It would hurt me more to let you go without telling you. Do you remember"—rushing
      desperately into her subject—"at the time you stayed with us at the Moat, that there was a
      great talk among us of my having my portrait painted?"
He knits his brow in an eager straining of his memory.
"Yes, I recollect."
"Father was wonderfully proud of me in those days; it seems impossible to believe it
      now"—with a passing look of incredulity at her own statement—"but he was."
"Yes, yes."
"Do you remember all the arranging and planning as to who was to be the artist, and that he
      was to come and stay in the house to paint it?"
Jim has put his hand up to his forehead as if to quicken the return of those faint and
      distant impressions which are coming out in stronger and stronger colours on memory's
      surface.
"Yes, yes; he was not an Englishman, was he? We used to laugh about him"—adding stroke to
      stroke in order to convince her of the accuracy of his recollections—"used to call him the
      'distinguished foreigner.'"
"Did we? Yes"—slowly—"I remember now that we did. Well"—gathering herself up for a supreme
      effort, panting painfully, and turning her head quite aside so that he may have no glimpse of
      her face—"he came, and he stayed two months, and at the end of those two months I—I—ran away
      with him!"
</div></body></text></TEI>