
CHAPTER VII.
There were many and various opinions concerning the fresh engagement of the musician. His
     lady friends could at first hardly believe that he should overlook them all, and choose a wife
     who was not one of themselves, and had never attended the receptions in the West End studio;
     but when they learnt that it was not only a fact, but that the date of the marriage was fixed,
     they at once did their best to meet the situation gracefully by buying the most appropriate
     wedding presents they could find, in the shape of biscuit boxes shaped like drums, and clocks
     mounted in lyres. This caused considerable rivalry among his pupils, which was not lessened by
     their desire to meet his betrothed, and their jealousy when this benefit was vouchsafed to one
     or another of them; they wondered among themselves whether they would be asked to call, and
     they allowed the musician to talk about her with a generosity which was three parts
     diplomacy.
Mrs. Reginald Routh presumed upon her intimacy with the musician so far as to invite Norah to
     stay with her.
"It has been the wish of my heart to see dear Mr. Digby married," was what she told every
     one, with her frank smile; "indeed, I have been trying to get him a wife for some years now,
     only it was so impossible to find one good enough. I have no doubt that Miss Bisley is all that
     could be desired, and one must leave something to a higher power sometimes; but I
     cannot help taking a little to my own credit as well, and I am convinced that Mr. Digby would
     never have thought of looking out for a wife at all if it had not been for my persuasions; he
     was far too fond of Ibsen, and Schopenhauer, and Bernard Shaw, and all those tiresome people.
     At all events, I never allowed a week to pass without asking him to dinner, and the picture of
     my domestic happiness must have done something for him. Ah, well, my work is done now; and
     thank God my ideal of friendship is too high to stand in the way of his marrying, though I have
     felt towards him like a sister, and it is hard at first to give up my place to another. But at
     least I know how to be generous, and she shall come and stay with me at once, so that there may
     be one friend in London for her when she is married. She will have to let me call
     then! And I shall be able to give her a hint or two about her future husband; I'm sure no one
     could know him better than I do. No doubt she is one of those artful little dolls who will
     annoy him until every nerve of his musical soul is on end, and he has to give up composing; and
     what will posterity do then?"
Mr. Reginald Routh, who never did anything but sign blank checks when he was told, was sent
     about town to buy the most expensive dessert service he could find; and when he brought back
     specimens to his invalid wife of choice plates with floral designs, he was sent out again to
     hunt for more suitable patterns, until the search ended, as his wife had intended it should, in
     a whole set being ordered from Paris, costing a guinea a plate, and decorated with a dainty
     design of pink cupids playing trumpets and harps in impossible positions.
The Raleighs, as a family, were glad. Owing to Norah's intervention the subject of Digby's
     first marriage was allowed to be mentioned, and a new toy was brought to the old manor in the
     shape of his four-year old son; and as the Squire was not asked to support the child, and as he
     learned furthermore that Digby's new wife would bring him money, he raised no objection to his
     marrying again, and allowed himself meanwhile to be completely enslaved by the tyrannical
     Sonny. The musician's sisters regarded Norah with the feelings of most sisters, excepting the
     most callous; that is, they wrote affectionately to her, with smiles on their lips and murder
     at their hearts, and they received affectionate letters in reply, which they declared they
     could "see through;" they were angry with every one who did not approve of the match, and they
     told one another gloomily that she was sure to be "designing;" they drew out long descriptions
     of his intended bride from the musician, and they only smiled when he told them that they would
     not like her at first, because she was so very different from all their friends. Lady Raleigh,
     who had always expected her eldest son to marry an opera singer or an actress, openly showed
     her relief at his engagement to an ordinary gentleman's daughter, who did not play or sing and
     had no particular talent for anything, who had never wished to be independent and to leave her
     home, and who went to church on Sunday morning with as much sense of duty and enjoyment as she
     bestowed on her breakfast.
And when Norah came to stay at Murville Manor, the impression she made was so pleasing that
     even the suspicious Digby had to acknowledge his engagement was at last going right. The Squire
     liked her because she never complained when he took her over the biggest duckery in the
     village, and because she read the whole of his pamphlet called "How to make £50 a year out of
     ducks," without disagreeing with it. Lady Raleigh liked her because she had always said she
     would; besides, Norah agreed that England was the only place for Jack. The boys said she
     "wasn't bad, but wanted backing up at times," which was a kindly criticism considering their
     bitter disappointment at not having Lady Joan for their sister-in-law. The girls fell in love
     with her because they could not help it; and their old nurse grudgingly allowed that she
     "couldn't have been nicer brought up, not if she had been your mamma's own child." There was
     something exemplary about Norah which always made her do the thing that was expected of her at
     the right moment. She never had a headache when the boys wanted her to romp with them, she did
     not hurt the children's feelings by speaking French before them, she always wanted music when
     Helen was going to sing, and she did not obtrude her affection for the family hero in public.
     Perhaps this last evidence of good breeding had more weight with the Raleighs than anything
     else she did.
Shortly before the marriage there was a monster reception in the studio in the West End. All
     the lady pupils lined the walls, and examined critically the names on the wedding presents, and
     wondered enviously where Norah bought her hats, and manœuvred anxiously for a few words with
     the musician. Mrs. Reginald Routh, in consideration of her being an invalid, sat in the most
     comfortable chair in the room, while Lady Raleigh, on the edge of an extremely straight-backed
     one, had to listen to her eulogies of Mr. Digby's music and Mr. Digby himself. The bride-elect
     as usual played her part excellently; she made her way through the toast-racks, and the plated
     spoons in pale-blue cases, and the pepper-pots, and the clocks with the musical devices, which
     were spread out on little tables all over the room; and she said a few gracious words to each
     lady pupil, in which she thanked her for her particular toast-rack or case of spoons, and hoped
     she would call after the marriage on the musician and herself in their flat in Victoria Street.
     And she ended her circuit of the room, as was, inevitable, beside the throne of Mrs. Reginald
     Routh, where she relieved Lady Raleigh for a time, and whence she was, from a quick survey of
     the attitude of every one present, that there was little chance of being relieved herself at
     all.
"This is the happiest moment of my life," murmured Mrs. Reginald, with a tremor in her voice;
     "you will excuse my foolish tears, will you not? He has been like a dear brother, an elder
     brother, to me ever since I have known him, and it is natural that I should have the jealous
     feeling of a sister in seeing him belong to another. It is only at first, of course—dear me!
     what a terrible tyrant deep affection is, to be sure! Don't mind me dear, I shall be better
     directly;" and she applied a lace handkerchief to a perfectly dry eye, and followed the passage
     of the musician among the wedding presents with the other.
"Why, there is that forward person who used to throw herself at Mr. Digby's head last
     season," she continued, recovering with rapidity, "Lady something or another,—came into the
     title by a fluke, I believe. Who is the handsome fellow she is flirting with now, eh? So that's
     Jack Raleigh, is it? Oh! I've heard about him. Not at all like his brother, is he?"
"He's very nice," said Norah, gently.
"Nice, is he? Then he doesn't know what he's got hold of in that young woman. I suppose she
     thinks as she can't get one, she'll have the other. Have you been introduced to her, my
     dear?"
"Yes—I have. That is, I—I stayed with her—for a night."
"I'm not surprised at that. She wants to know you after your marriage, my dear. That is where
     you will feel your inexperience, when these designing clever women come and play upon your
     ignorance in order to get at your husband. You will feel the want of some nice sensible married
     woman, not too old, who has been through it all, and can help you to see through them. I've no
     patience with these women who won't have husbands of their own, but must needs go running after
     other people's. Ah-h, Mr. Digby, is it really true that we are to hear the last
     movement of the trio this afternoon? How quite too lovely!"
The musician cleverly introduced his father to her at this point, and hastened off to the
     piano; and Sir Marcus, who had not been enjoying himself at all in a circle whose interests
     were not his own, settled himself down to a denunciation of town life, which necessarily led
     him on to the allotment question; and Mrs. Reginald Routh for the first time in her life found
     she had met her match.
"You're feeling played out, aren't you?" Jack Raleigh was saying to his companion while the
     instruments were being tuned.
"Oh, no, only bored to death. I wonder which is the worst, to be married or musical? But both
     at once—poor Mr. Raleigh!"
Jack broke into a laugh, which was hardly warranted by the smallness of the joke; and as the
     first chord was struck on the piano simultaneously, Lady Joan's reputation was not improved
     among the disturbed audience by the circumstance. At any other time she would have enjoyed the
     shocked glances that were thrown in her direction; but this afternoon she was feeling too cross
     to be perverse, and she hardly waited for the end of the trio to take leave of the smiling
     host.
"So you're off already? I knew you were played out," said Jack, whose vocabulary, like his
     perception, was limited; "shall I let fly for a hansom?"
"Oh, no; didn't I tell you before that I had the carriage?" answered Lady Joan, impatiently,
     though she realized the futility of censuring an offender who was always blind to his offence.
     "And I can see myself out, thank you."
"But—you will let me come with you? It's beastly foggy out, and something might easily
     happen, don't you know. You said you hadn't brought the man along, and I'd sooner see you
     through, 'pon my honor I would. I won't bother, I won't really, don't you know, and you can
     fire me at the next block if I'm in the way. That's straight, isn't it?"
In spite of the American drawl, there was something familiar in the pleading tones of his
     voice that reminded her unpleasantly of an incident she had been trying to forget, and she
     would have curtly refused his offer had she not found the pale eyes of Mrs. Reginald Routh
     fixed inquiringly upon her.
"If you like, I shall be delighted," she said, with a sudden show of graciousness that both
     pleased and surprised him; "you will see if the brougham is there? Good-bye, Mrs. Routh; so
     glad to see you looking so well. I suppose I can't give you a lift? Auf Wiedersehen, Norah;
     shall expect you both to lunch to-morrow; don't forget. What detestable weather it is; I shall
     go and vegetate at Relton if this fog goes on. Is it there, Mr. Jack? Oh, thanks very
     much."
In the brougham, she leaned back and closed her eyes, and wished the fog did not make them
     smart, and that she had managed to evade her companion after all, in spite of the exquisite
     annoyance he had enabled her to inflict on Mrs. Reginald. But Jack guessed nothing of her
     thoughts, and plodded on with his own instead, which all related to her and to a certain desire
     that filled his mind at that moment; he could only think about one thing at a time.
"I say, you—you didn't rightly mean what you said just now, did you?" he began slowly, as
     they stopped in the Circus in a dead block of omnibuses and traffic.
"What did I say? I've forgotten long ago. You promised not to bother," returned Lady Joan,
     shortly, which was not encouraging.
But Jack was not easily snubbed.
"You said that marriage was tommy rot, don't you know," he pursued steadily.
She opened her eyes wide and stared at him.
"I didn't say so. But it is. Why?"
"Oh, well, you know, because I don't think it is exactly. At least I mean I don't see why it
     should be, don't you know."
"Then perhaps it isn't. It doesn't matter, does it? Oh, why don't we go on?"
"I say, how jolly smart you are to-day," he said crossly, and dropped the drawl.
"Why? Because I don't wish to discuss the marriage question? I am so sick of it. If that is
     all you want, go and read Björnson and all the others. Modern fiction is crammed with it, so is
     the modern drama. Your brother can lend you crowds of books about the marriage question—he
     won't want them for a year or two." She ended with a little hard laugh.
"You know I don't care a hang for the marriage question," he said sulkily.
"No more do I," she said cheerfully, "so we'll let it drop. I am so glad you are not modern.
     Do you know, the first night I saw you—"
"Yes?" he said eagerly, as she stopped. It is a sure sign of comradeship when two people
     begin comparing notes about their first meeting.
"Oh," she continued carelessly, "I only felt relieved that you had no views and no ideas, and
     didn't want a revolution like your brother, and never fell in love with people. It made you so
     nice to flirt with, that was all. Thank Heaven, we are going on again at last."
Jack only hated the policeman for letting them pass; the fog was lifting in Oxford Street,
     and they were rolling along quickly in the direction of Pont Street; there was no time to be
     lost.
"Do listen seriously for once," he suggested; "why shouldn't marriage between two
     fellows—"
"I thought we had agreed to let it drop," she interrupted impatiently.
"But it isn't the marriage question. It—it's marriage itself," he cried desperately, and then
     held his breath.
They had turned down Park Lane into the yellow darkness again, and the two in the brougham
     could not even see each other's features. Outside, the policemen were shouting directions;
     within the carriage, Lady Joan was leaning back far in her corner, and thinking swiftly. Was
     this to be the solution of all that had been puzzling her this afternoon? It was not often that
     Lady Joan was depressed; but when she was, a yellow fog was not more gloomy than her mood.
"Don't you see how I've loved you all the time? It's not my form to gas like Digby, and I
     suppose I'm a bally idiot, because the guvnor always says I am, and of course I haven't any
     oof; so it's all confounded cheek on my part, it is really, don't you know. But—you said you
     hated to be married, so why shouldn't we be engaged, just enough to stop people from talking,
     don't you know, so that we could belong, sort of; do you twig? I'd give you my word of honor to
     go back to the States, and work like a nigger till—till you sent for me again. That wouldn't
     bother you, and it might be rather jolly, don't you know. And that's all there is to it."
She was still silent. If he had known that she was comparing his proposal with the one she
     had had in the summer, and calculating how much happiness and comfort she was likely to get out
     of his romantic attachment to her, his ideal of her might have received a shock. But for the
     sake of ideals some thoughts are allowed to go unread; and he only noticed that she moved a
     little out of her corner, and he at once drew nearer to her.
"I do love you, dear," he said tremulously, and ventured to lay his broad palm on hers;
     "don't you think—we might—"
One of the blind impulses came to him which were his making and his ruin. Lady Joan would
     have loathed him at that moment if he had done anything commonplace, or waited for her to take
     the initiative. But he put his arm round her waist so softly that she scarcely felt it.
"May I kiss you?" he whispered.
