
Chapter 4
The Pit
So bewildered was the poor iron-merchant by the strange and terrible events that had befallen
     him, that, though released by the two masked attendants, who left him, as before related, to
     seize Gerard Paston, he felt utterly incapable of exertion, and would probably have made no
     effort to regain his freedom, if his coat had not been vigorously plucked behind, while a low
     voice urged him to fly. Glancing in the direction of the friendly speaker, he could just
     discern a diminutive object standing within the entrance of a side-passage, and reared up
     against the wall so as to be out of sight of Rougemont and his attendants. It was the monkey—or
     rather Old Parr—who, continuing to tug violently at his coat, at last succeeded in drawing him
     backwards into the passage, and then grasping his hand tightly, hurried him along it. The
     passage was wholly unlighted, but Mr. Thorneycroft could perceive that it was exceedingly
     circuitous, and winded round like a maze.
“Where are you taking me?” he inquired, attempting to stop.
“Ask no questions,” rejoined the dwarf, pulling him along. “Do you want to be captured, and
     shut up in a cell for the rest of your life?”
“Certainly not,” replied Thorneycroft, accelerating his movements; “I hope there’s no chance
     of it.”
“There’s every chance of it,” rejoined Old Parr. “If you’re taken, you’ll share Auriol’s
     fate.”
“O Lord! I hope not,” groaned the iron-merchant. “I declare, you frighten me so much that you
     take away all power of movement. I shall drop in a minute.”
“Come along, I say,” screamed the dwarf. “I hear them close behind us.”
And as he spoke, shouts, and the noise of rapidly-approaching footsteps, resounded along the
     passage.
“I can’t stir another step,” gasped the iron-merchant. “I’m completely done. Better yield at
     once.”
“What, without a struggle?” cried the dwarf tauntingly. “Think of your daughter, and let the
     thought of her nerve your heart. She is lost for ever, if you don’t get out of this accursed
     place.”
“She is lost for ever as it is,” cried the iron-merchant despairingly.
“No—she may yet be saved,” rejoined the dwarf. “Come on—come on—they are close behind
     us.”
And it was evident, from the increased clamour, that their pursuers were upon them.
Roused by the imminence of the danger, and by the hope of rescuing his daughter, Mr.
     Thorneycroft exerted all his energies, and sprang forward. A little farther on, they were
     stopped by a door. It was closed; and venting his disappointment in a scream, the dwarf
     searched for the handle, but could not find it.
“We are entrapped—we shall be caught,” he cried, “and then woe to both of us. Fool that I was
     to attempt your preservation. Better I had left you to rot in a dungeon than have incurred
     Rougemont’s displeasure.”
The iron-merchant replied by a groan.
“It’s all over with me,” he said. “I give it up—I’ll die here!”
“No—we are saved,” cried the dwarf, as the light, now flashing strongly upon the door,
     revealed a small iron button within it,—“saved—saved!”
As he spoke, he pressed against the button, which moved a spring, and the door flew open.
     Just as they passed through it, the two masked attendants came in sight. The dwarf instantly
     shut the door, and finding a bolt on the side next him, shot it into the socket. Scarcely had
     he accomplished this, when the pursuers came up, and dashed themselves against the door; but
     finding it bolted, presently ceased their efforts, and apparently withdrew.
“They are gone by some other way to intercept us,” cried Old Parr, who had paused for a
     moment to listen; “come on, Mr. Thorneycroft.”
“I’ll try,” replied the iron-merchant, with a subdued groan, “but I’m completely spent. Oh
     that I ever ventured into this place!”
“It’s too late to think of that now; besides, you came here to rescue your daughter,”
     rejoined Old Parr. “Take care and keep near me. I wonder where this passage leads to?”
“Don’t you know?” inquired the iron-merchant.
“Not in the least,” returned the dwarf. “This is the first time I’ve been here—and it shall
     be the last, if I’m allowed any choice in the matter.”
“You haven’t told me how you came here at all,” observed Thorneycroft.
“I hardly know myself,” replied the dwarf; “but I find it more difficult to get out than I
     did to get in. How this passage twists about! I declare we seem to be returning to the point we
     started from.”
“I think we are turning round ourselves,” cried Thorneycroft, in an agony of fright. “My head
     is going. Oh dear! oh dear!”
“Why, it does seem very strange, I must say,” remarked the dwarf, coming to a halt. “I could
     almost fancy that the solid stone walls were moving around us.”
“They are moving,” cried Thorneycroft, stretching out his hand. “I feel ’em. Lord
     have mercy upon us, and deliver us from the power of the Evil One!”
“The place seems on fire,” cried the dwarf. “A thick smoke fills the passage. Don’t you
     perceive it, Mr. Thorneycroft?”
“Don’t I!—to be sure I do,” cried the iron-merchant, coughing and sneezing. “I feel as if I
     were in a room with a smoky chimney, and no window open. Oh!—oh!—I’m choking!”
“Don’t mind it,” cried the dwarf, who seemed quite at his ease. “We shall soon be out of the
     smoke.”
“I can’t stand it,” cried Mr. Thorneycroft; “I shall die. Oh! poah—pish—puff!”
“Come on, I tell you—you’ll get some fresh air in a minute,” rejoined Old Parr. “Halloa!
     how’s this? No outlet. We’re come to a dead stop.”
“Dead stop, indeed!” echoed the iron-merchant. “We’ve come to that long ago. But what new
     difficulty has arisen?”
“Merely that the road’s blocked up by a solid wall—that’s all,” replied Old Parr.
“Blocked up!” exclaimed Thorneycroft. “Then we’re entombed alive.”
“I am,” said the dwarf, with affected nonchalance. “As to you, you’ve the comfort of
     knowing it’ll soon be over with you. But for me, nothing can harm me.”
“Don’t be too sure of that,” cried a voice above them.
“Did you speak, Mr. Thorneycroft?” asked the dwarf.
“N-o-o—not I,” gasped the iron-merchant. “I’m suffocating—help to drag me out.”
“Get out if you can,” cried the voice that had just spoken.
“It’s Rougemont himself,” cried the dwarf in alarm. “Then there’s no escape.”
“None whatever, rascal,” replied the unseen speaker. “I want you. I have more work for you to
     do.”
“I won’t leave Mr. Thorneycroft,” cried the dwarf resolutely. “I’ve promised to preserve him,
     and I’ll keep my word.”
“Fool!” cried the other. “You must obey when I command.”
And as the words were uttered, a hand was thrust down from above, which, grasping the dwarf
     by the nape of the neck, drew him upwards.
“Lay hold of me, Mr. Thorneycroft,” screamed Old Parr. “I’m going up again—lay hold of
     me—pull me down.”
Well-nigh stifled by the thickening and pungent vapour, the poor iron-merchant found
     compliance impossible. Before he could reach the dwarf, the little fellow was carried off. Left
     to himself, Mr. Thorneycroft staggered along the passage, expecting every moment to drop, until
     at length a current of fresh air blew in his face, and enabled him to breathe more freely.
     Somewhat revived, he went on, but with great deliberation, and it was well he did so, for he
     suddenly arrived at the brink of a pit about eight feet in depth, into which, if he had
     approached it incautiously, he must infallibly have stumbled, and in all probability have
     broken his neck. This pit evidently communicated with a lower range of chambers, as was shown
     by a brazen lamp burning under an archway. A ladder was planted at one side, and by this Mr.
     Thorneycroft descended, but scarcely had he set foot on the ground, than he felt himself rudely
     grasped by a man who stepped from under the archway. The next moment, however, he was released,
     while the familiar voice of the Tinker exclaimed—
“Vy, bless my ‘art, if it ain’t Mister Thorneycroft.”
“Yes, it’s me, certainly, Mr. Tinker,” replied the iron-merchant. “Who’s that you’ve got with
     you?”
“Vy, who should it be but the Sandman,” rejoined the other gruffly. “Ve’ve set ourselves free
     at last, and have made some nice diskiveries into the bargin.”
“Yes, ve’ve found it all out,” added the Tinker.
“What have you discovered—what have you found out?” cried the iron-merchant breathlessly.
     “Have you found my daughter? Where is she? Take me to her.”
“Not so fast, old gent, not so fast,” rejoined the Tinker. “Ve ain’t sure as ‘ow ve’ve found
     your darter, but ve’ve catched a peep of a nice young ‘ooman.”
“Oh! it must be her—no doubt of it,” cried the iron-merchant. “Where is she? Take me to her
     without a moment’s delay.”
“But ve can’t get to her, I tell ‘ee,” replied the Tinker. “Ve knows the place vere she’s
     a-shut up,—that’s all.”
“Take me to it,” cried Mr. Thorneycroft eagerly.
“Vell, if you must go, step this vay, then,” rejoined the Tinker, proceeding towards the
     archway. “Halloa, Sandy, did you shut the door arter you?”
“Not I,” replied the other; “open it.”
“Easily said,” rejoined the Tinker, “but not quevite so easily done. Vy, zounds, it’s shut of
     itself and bolted itself on t’other side!”
“Some one must have followed you,” groaned Thorneycroft. “We’re watched on all sides.”
“Ay, and from above, too,” cried the Sandman. “Look up there!” he added, in accents of
     alarm.
“What’s the matter? What new danger is at hand?” inquired the iron-merchant.
“Look up, I say,” cried the Sandman. “Don’t ye see, Tinker?”
“Ay, ay, I see,” replied the other. “The roof’s a-comin’ in upon us. Let’s get out o’ this as
     fast as ve can.” And he kicked and pushed against the door, but all his efforts were unavailing
     to burst it open.
At the same time the Sandman rushed towards the ladder, but before he could mount it all
     egress by that means was cut off. An immense iron cover worked in a groove was pushed by some
     unseen machinery over the top of the pit, and enclosed them in it.
