
CHAPTER VII.
POOR SNIP.
The middle weeks of August were come—sunny, sultry weeks; and from the brow
                         of the hill, all the vast plain lying westward for many miles looked golden
                         with the corn ripening for harvest. The oats in the little field had
                         already been reaped; and the fruit in the garden, gathered and sold by
                         Martha, had brought in a few shillings, which were carefully hoarded up to
                         buy winter clothing. It was now the time of the yearly gathering of
                         bilberries on the hills; and tribes of women and children ascended to the
                         tableland from all the villages round. It was the pleasantest work of the
                         year; and Martha, who had never missed the bilberry season since she could
                         remember, was not likely to miss it now. Even little Nan could help to pick
                         the berries, and she and Martha were out on the hillsides all the livelong
                         summer day. Their dwelling on the spot gave them a good advantage over
                         those who lived down in Botfield; and each day, before any of the others
                         could reach the best bilberry-wires, they had already picked a quart of the
                         small purple berries, fresh and cool with the dew of the morning. Only the
                         poor old grandfather had to be left at home alone, with his dinner put
                         ready for him, which he was apt to eat up long before the proper
                         dinner-hour came; and then he had to wait until Stephen returned from his
                         work, or Martha and little Nan were driven home by the August
                         thunderstorms. Martha was wonderfully successful this year, and gained more
                         money by selling her bilberries than she thought necessary to show to
                         Stephen; though, on his part, he always brought her every penny of his
                         wages.
Ever since their father's funeral there had been a subject of dispute between
                         the brother and sister. Martha was bent upon enclosing the green dell, with
                         its clear, cool little pond; and to this end she spent all the time she
                         could spare in raising a rough fence of stones and peat round it. But
                         Stephen would not consent to it; and neither argument, scolding, nor
                         coaxing could turn him. He always answered that he had promised the master
                         that he would not trespass on the manor; and he must stand to his word,
                         whatever they might lose by it; though, indeed, he saw no harm in making
                         green fields out of the waste land. Martha, on her side, maintained her
                         right as the eldest to act as she judged best; and, moreover, urged the
                         example of her thrifty grandmother, who had planned this very enclosure,
                         and whose pattern she was determined to follow. But before long the dispute
                         was ended, and the subject of it became a matter of heart-troubling wonder,
                         for several labourers from the master's farm began to fence in the very
                         same ground, as well as to prepare the turf behind Fern's Hollow for the
                         planting of young trees; and neither Stephen nor Martha could hide from the
                         other that these labours made them feel exceedingly uneasy.
'I say, Stephen,' said one of the hedgers, as he was going down from his work
                         one evening, and met the tired boy coming up from his, 'I'm afeared there's
                         some mischief brewing. There's master, and Mr. Thomas, and Mr. Jones the
                         gamekeeper, been talking with thy grandfather nigh upon an hour. There'll
                         be a upshot some day, I know; and Jones, he said summat about leaving a
                         keepsake for thee.'
'What could it be, William?' asked Stephen anxiously.
'How should I know?' said the man, with some reluctance. 'Only, lad, I did
                         hear a gun go off; and I never heard Snip bark again, though I listened for
                         him. Stephen, Stephen, dunna thee go so mad like!'
But it was no use shouting after Stephen, as he ran frantically up the hill.
                         Snip was always basking lazily in the sunshine under the hedge of the
                         paddock, at the very point where he could catch the first sight of his
                         young master, after which there was no more idleness or stillness in him.
                         Stephen could hardly breathe when he found that Snip was not at the usual
                         place to greet him; but before he reached his home he saw it—the dead body
                         of his own poor Snip—hung on the post of the wicket through which he had to
                         pass. He flew to the place; he tore his own hands with the nails that were
                         driven through Snip's feet; and then, without a thought of his grandfather
                         or of his own hunger, he bore away the dead dog in his arms, and wandered
                         far out of sight or sound of the hateful, cruel world, into one of the most
                         solitary plains upon the uplands.
Any one passing by might have thought that Stephen was fast asleep in the
                         last slanting rays of the sun, which shone upon him there some time after
                         the evening shadows had fallen upon Botfield; but a frenzy of passion, too
                         strong for any words, had felled him to the ground, where he lay beside
                         Snip. The gamekeeper, who had so many dogs that he did not care for any one
                         of them in particular, had killed this one creature that was dearer to him
                         than anything in the world, except little Nan, and grandfather, and Martha.
                         And Snip was dead, without remedy; no power on earth could bring back the
                         departed life. Oh, if he could only punish the villain who had shot his
                         poor faithful dog! But he was nothing but a poor boy, very poor, and very
                         helpless and friendless, and people would only laugh at his trouble. All
                         the world was against him, and he could do nothing to revenge himself, but
                         to hate everybody!
'Why, lad! why, Stephen! what ails thee?' said Black Thompson's voice, close
                         behind him. 'Eh! who's gone and shot Snip? That rascal Jones, I'll go bail!
                         Is he quite dead, Stephen? Stand up, lad, and let's give a look at
                         him.'
The boy rose, and faced Black Thompson and his comrade with eyes that were
                         bloodshot, though he had not shed a tear, and with lips almost bitten
                         through by his angry teeth. Both the men handled the dog gently and
                         carefully, but, after a moment's inspection, Thompson laid it down again on
                         the turf.
'It's a shame!' he cried, with an oath that sounded pleasantly in Stephen's
                         ears; 'it was one of the best little dogs about. I'd take my vengeance on
                         him for this. In thy place, I couldn't sleep till I'd done something.'
'Ay!' said Stephen, with flashing eyes; 'I know where he's keeping a covey of
                         birds up against game day—nineteen of them. I've seen them every day, and I
                         could go to the place in the dark.'
'That's a brave lad!' said Black Thompson; 'he's got his father's pluck after
                         all, as I've always told thee, Davies, and we'll see him righted. He's got
                         his eyes in his head, has this lad!'
'They're down in the leasowe, between the Firspinny and Ragleth Hill,'
                         continued Stephen; 'and they're just prime, I can tell ye. And I know, too,
                         what he doesn't know himself. I know to some black game, far away up the
                         hill. He'd give his two eyes to see them, with their white wing-feathers;
                         and if he hadn't'—
Stephen stopped, with quivering lips, for he could not speak yet of Snip's
                         murder.
'Never take on, my lad,' said Black Thompson, clapping him on the back;
                         'we'll spoil his sport for him. Come thy ways with us; it'll be dark dusk
                         afore we gain the spinny, and Jones is off to the Whitehurst woods
                         to-night. We'll have as rare sport as the lord of the manor himself. Thee
                         art a sharp one. I'd lay a round wager, now, thee knows where all the sheep
                         of the hillside fold of nights.'
'Ay, do I,' answered Stephen, walking briskly beside Black Thompson; 'I know
                         every walk and every fold on the hills; ay, and many of the sheep
                         themselves. I keep my eyes wide open out of doors, I promise ye.'
'I'll swear to that,' said Black Thompson, glad to encourage the boy in his
                         foolish boasting. On their way they passed near to Fern's Hollow, and
                         Stephen heard little Nan's shrill voice calling his name, as if she were
                         seeking him weariedly; but when he hesitated for a moment, his heart
                         yearning to answer her, Black Thompson again patted him on the back, and
                         bade him never show the white feather, but remember poor dead Snip; at
                         which his passion for revenge returned, and he pressed on eagerly to the
                         fir-coppice.
It was quite dark when they entered the path leading through the wood. No one
                         spoke now, and they trod cautiously, lest there should be any noise from
                         their footsteps. The tall black fir-trees towered above them to an unusual
                         height; and through all the topmost branches there ran a low, mournful
                         sound, as if every tree was whispering about them, and lamenting over them.
                         Even the little brook, which in the sunshine rippled so merrily along the
                         borders of the wood, seemed to be sobbing like a grieved and tired child in
                         the night-time. Strange rustlings on every side, and sudden groanings of
                         the withered boughs in some of the pines, made them start in fear; and
                         once, in a little opening among the trees, when the stars came out and
                         looked down upon them, Stephen would have given all he had in the world to
                         be safe at home, with little Nan singing hymns on his knee, or quietly
                         asleep after the hot and busy day.
'It's lonesome enough to make a bull-dog afeared,' whispered Davies, in a
                         frightened tone. But before long they were out of the wood; and in the
                         glimmer of light that lasts all night through during the summer, Stephen
                         saw Black Thompson unwind a net, which had been wrapped round his body
                         under his collier's jacket. More than half the covey of partridges were
                         bagged; and they had such capital luck, as the men called it, that Stephen
                         soon entered into the daring spirit of the adventure. It sent a thrill of
                         excitement through him, in which poor Snip was for the time forgotten; and
                         when about midnight Black Thompson and Davies said 'Good-night' to him at
                         his cottage door, calling him a brave fellow, and giving him a fine young
                         leveret, with the promise that he should have his share of whatever money
                         they received for their spoil, he entered his dark home, where every one
                         was slumbering peacefully, and, without a thought of sorrow or repentance,
                         was quickly asleep himself.
