
CHAPTER V.
MISS ANNE.
'So thee's the only master here,' said Tim when he came up the hill next
                         evening, according to his promise, to help Stephen in his garden.
'And I'm the missis,' chimed in Martha, 'but I can't say how long it may be
                         afore we have to pack off;' and she gave Tim a very long account of the
                         master's visit the day before, finishing her description of Stephen's
                         conduct in a tone of mingled reproach and admiration: 'And he never said a
                         single curse at them!'
'Not when they were out of hearing?' exclaimed Tim.
'I couldn't,' answered Stephen; 'I knew what I ought to do then, if I wasn't
                         quite sure about fighting thee, Tim. My chapter says, "Swear not at all;"
                         and "Let your communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay; for whatsoever is more
                         than these cometh of evil."'
'What's the meaning of that?' asked Tim, opening his eyes widely.
'Father said it meant I was to stand to my word like a man, but not swear
                         about it. If I said Ay, to mean ay; and if I said No, to mean no, and stick
                         to it.'
'There'd be no room for telling lies, I reckon,' said Tim reflectively.
'Of course not,' replied Stephen.
'That 'ud never answer down yonder,' said Tim, nodding towards the distant
                         village. 'I tell thee what, lad, I'll come and quarter with thee, and help
                         thee to be master. It 'ud be prime. Only maybe the victuals wouldn't suit
                         me. Last Sunday, afore thy father's buryin', we'd a dinner of duck and
                         green peas, and leg of lamb, and custard pudden, and ale. Martha doesn't
                         get a dinner like that for thee, I reckon.'
'No,' answered Stephen shortly.
'Maybe it wouldn't suit. But what more is there in thy book?' asked Tim,
                         whose curiosity was aroused; and Stephen, proud of his new
                         accomplishment,—a rare one in those days among his own class,—would not
                         lose the opportunity given him by Tim's inquiry for the display of his
                         learning. He brought out his Bible with alacrity, and read his chapter in a
                         loud, clear, sing-song tone, while Tim overlooked him, with his red face
                         growing redder, and his eyebrows arched in amazement; and Martha, leaning
                         against the door-post, glanced triumphantly at his wonder. Already, though
                         his father had been dead only a week, Stephen began to miscall many of the
                         harder words; but his hearers were not critical, and the performance gave
                         unbounded satisfaction.
'That beats me!' cried Tim. 'What a headpiece thee must have, Stephen! But
                         what does it all mean, lad? Is it all English like?'
'How can I know?' answered Stephen, somewhat sadly; 'there's nobody to learn
                         me now; and it's very hard. There's the Pharisees, Tim, and Raca; I don't
                         know who they are.'
The conversation was stopped by Martha suddenly starting bolt upright, and
                         dropping two or three hurried curtseys. The boys looked up from their book
                         quickly, and saw a young lady passing through the wicket and coming up the
                         garden walk, with a smile upon her pleasant face as she met their gaze.
'My boys,' she said, in a soft, kindly voice, 'I've been sitting on the bank
                         yonder, behind your cottage; and I heard one of you reading a chapter in
                         the Bible. Which of you was it?'
'It was him,' cried Tim and Martha together, pointing at Stephen.
'And you said you had no one to teach you,' continued the lady. 'Now would
                         you learn well, if I promised to teach you?'
Stephen looked up speechlessly into the smiling face before him. He had never
                         read of the angels, and scarcely knew that there were such beings; but he
                         felt as if this fair and sweet-looking lady, with her gentle voice, and the
                         kindly eyes meeting his own, was altogether of a different order to
                         themselves.
'I am Mr. Wyley's niece,' she added, 'and I am come to live at Botfield for a
                         while. Could you manage to come down to Mr. Wyley's house sometimes for a
                         lesson?'
'Please, ma'am,' said Martha, who was not at all afraid of speaking to any
                         lady, though she dare not face the master, 'he wants to turn us out of our
                         house; and he hates Stephen, because he won't give it up: so he wouldn't
                         let you teach him anything.'
'Then you are Stephen Fern?' said the lady; 'I heard my uncle talking about
                         you. Your father was buried at Longville church on Sunday. I saw the
                         funeral leave the churchyard, and I looked for some of you to come in to
                         the evening service. Now, Stephen, do you tell me all about your reason for
                         not letting my uncle buy your cottage.'
Then Stephen, with some hesitation, and a good deal of assistance from
                         Martha, told the whole history of his grandmother's settlement upon the
                         solitary hillside, only withholding the fact of his grandfather's
                         transportation, because Tim was listening eagerly to every word. Miss Anne
                         listened, too, with deep attention; and once or twice the tears rose to her
                         eyes as she heard of the weary labours and watchings of the desolate woman;
                         and when Stephen repeated his resolution to work hard and constantly for
                         the maintenance of his grandfather and little Nan—
'Yes, I will be your friend,' she said, reaching out her hand to him when he
                         had finished, 'even if my uncle is your enemy. God has not given me much
                         power, but what I have I will use for you; and you must go on striving to
                         do right, Stephen.'
'I can't read much,' replied Stephen anxiously, 'and Martha can't read at
                         all; but I hope we shall all get safe to heaven!'
'Knowing how to read will not take us to heaven,' said Miss Anne, smiling,
                         'but doing the will of God from the heart; and the will of God is that we
                         should believe in the Lord Jesus, and follow in His steps.'
'Yes, ma'am,' answered Stephen; 'my chapter says, "Whosoever shall break one
                         of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called the
                         least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the
                         same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven."'
'Stephen, you know your chapter well,' said Miss Anne.
'I don't know anything else,' he answered; 'so I am always studying at that
                         in my head, up here and down in the pit.'
'He's always mighty solid over his work, ma'am,' said Tim, pulling the front
                         lock of his red hair, as he spoke to the young lady.
'Stephen, do you know that you have a namesake in the Bible?' asked Miss
                         Anne.
'No, sure!' exclaimed Stephen eagerly.
'It was the name of a man who had many enemies, only because he loved the
                         Lord Jesus; and at last they hated him so much as to kill him. He was the
                         very first person who ever suffered death for the Lord's sake. Give me your
                         Bible, and I will read to you how he died.'
Miss Anne's voice was very low and soft, like sweet music, as she read these
                         verses: 'And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus,
                         receive my spirit. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord,
                         lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell
                         asleep.'
Stephen listened breathlessly, and his face glowed with intense interest; but
                         he was not a boy of ready speech, and, before he could utter a word, Tim
                         burst in before him with a question, 'Please, is there a Tim in the Bible?'
                         he asked.
'Yes,' answered Miss Anne, smiling again; 'he was a young man who knew the
                         Bible from his youth.'
'That ain't me, however,' said Tim in a despondent tone.
'There is nothing now to prevent you beginning to know it,' continued Miss
                         Anne. 'Listen: as Stephen cannot come to me at Botfield, you shall meet me
                         in the Red Gravel Pit at nine o'clock on a Sunday morning as long as the
                         summer lasts, and I will teach you all. Bring little Nan with you,
                         Stephen.'
Down the same narrow green pathway trodden by the feet of Stephen's angry
                         master and his brother the evening before, they now watched the little
                         light figure of the young lady, as she slowly vanished out of their sight.
                         When the gleaming of her dress was quite lost, Stephen rubbed his eyes for
                         a moment, and then turned to Martha and Tim.
'Is she a real woman, dost think?' he asked.
'A real woman!' repeated Martha rather scornfully; 'of course she is; and
                         it's a real silk gown she had on, I can tell thee. Spirits don't go about
                         in silk gowns and broad daylight, never as I heard tell of, lad.'
