<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>William — an Englishman</title><author>Hamilton, Cicely (1872-1952)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1919</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER IX
One of the features of the interview that struck William later on was this—during all the
     long minutes that it lasted Griselda had spoken no words. For once the tumult and amazement of
     her soul was beyond her glib power of expression and it was only as they came into the open air
     that—for the first time since she had seen the hostages die—she unclosed her lips and
     spoke.
"What are they going to do with us?" she asked. Her voice was husky and uncertain, and the
     words came out in little jerks.
William gave the question no answer: for one thing because his ignorance of their destiny was
     as thorough as his wife's; for another because speech, by reason of Heinz's firm grip on his
     collar, was so difficult as to be almost impossible. The man had his knuckles thrust tightly
     between shirt and skin; William purpled and gasped as he trotted down the street with a collar
     stud pressing on his windpipe. Behind him when he started came Griselda and her guard; as he
     could not twist his head to look over his shoulder he had no suspicion that the couples had
     parted company, and it was not until his captor turned him sharply to the right down a by-road
     leading to the station that he discovered, in rounding the corner, that his wife and her escort
     were no longer following in his footsteps. The momentary sidelong glimpse he caught of the road
     gave him never a sight of Griselda; she had vanished without word or sign. For a moment he
     could hardly believe it and walked on stupidly in silence; then, the stupor passing, his terror
     found voice and he clamoured.
"Where's my wife?" he cried out and writhed instinctively to free himself. His reward was a
     tightening of the German's strangle-hold, some most hearty abuse and some even heartier kicks.
     Under the punishment he lost his foothold and would have fallen but for Heinz's clutch upon his
     collar; when the punishment was over he was brought up trembling and choking. In that moment he
     suffered the fiercest of torments, the fire of an ineffectual hate. He hated Heinz and could
     have torn him; but he had been taught the folly of blind wrestling with the stronger and, for
     Griselda's sake, he swallowed his fury and cringed.
"Where is she?" he begged most humbly and pitifully as Heinz thrust him forward again. "For
     mercy's sake tell me what you have done with my wife—with my wife? ... If you will only let me
     know where she is? That's all—just to let me know."
He was answered by the silence of contempt and a renewed urge along the road; he obeyed
     because he could do no other, whimpering aloud in the misery of this new and sharpest of
     misfortunes. As he pled and whimpered terrible thoughts came hurrying into his brain; all
     things were possible in these evil times and among these evil men—and there was a dreadful,
     hideously familiar phrase anent "licentious soldiery": a phrase that had once been just a
     phrase and that was now a present horror beating hard in his burning head. He stumbled on with
     the tears running down his cheeks, and discovered suddenly that he was whispering under his
     breath the name of God—all things else having failed him. He did not realize that he was
     sobbing and shedding great tears until halfway along the road when a German soldier met them.
     The man as he passed turned his head to laugh at the sight of a face grotesque and distorted in
     its wretchedness; whereupon there flared up again in William that new sense of blood and breed
     and with it an instant rush of shame that he had wept before these—Germans! He gulped back his
     tears, strove to stiffen his face and clenched his hands to endure.
He had need in the hours that came after of all his powers of endurance alike of body and of
     mind. The day that already seemed age-long was far from being at its height when Griselda was
     taken away from him and all through the heat till close upon sundown he was put to hard
     physical toil. Level with the village the railway line had been torn up and the little wayside
     station was a half-burnt mass of wreckage; a detachment of retreating Belgians had done their
     best to destroy it, had derailed an engine and half a dozen trucks and done such damage as time
     allowed to a stretch of the permanent way. In its turn a detachment of Germans was hard at work
     at removal of the wreckage and repairs to the line; and into their service they had pressed
     such villagers as had not fled at their approach. A cowed, unhappy band they toiled and
     sweated, dug, carried loads and levelled the broken soil; some stupidly submissive, some openly
     sullen to their captors, some pitiably eager to please: all serfs for the time being and all of
     them ignorant of what the next hour might bring forth of further terror or misfortune.
To this captive little company William Tully was joined, handed over by Heinz to its
     taskmaster—to become of them all the most pitiable, because for the first time in all his days
     set to bend his back and use his muscles in downright labour of the body. What to others was
     merely hardship, to him became torment unspeakable; he wearied, he sweated, he ached from head
     to heel. When he pulled at heavy wreckage he cut his soft clumsy fingers; when he dragged a
     load or carried it he strained his unaccustomed back. His hands bled and blistered and the
     drops of perspiration poured off him; when he worked slowly because of his weariness or lack of
     skill, authority made no allowance for either and a blow often followed a curse. Sometimes
     incomprehensible orders were shouted at him and he would run to obey confusedly, for fear of
     the punishment meted out without mercy to the dilatory—guessing at what was required of him,
     sometimes rightly and sometimes wrongly. The day remained on his mind as an impression of
     muddled terror and panic intense and unceasing.
When he thought he was not being watched he would lift his head from his toil and strain his
     eyes this way and that in the hope of a glimpse of Griselda. Unspeakably greater than his fear
     for himself was the measure of his fear for his wife. He knew that somewhere she must be held
     by force in the same way that he was held, otherwise she would have sought him out long ere
     this, and, even if not allowed to approach or speak would have managed to see him and make him
     some sign that his heart might be set at rest. His brain was giddy with undefined horror and
     once or twice he started and raised his head imagining that Griselda was calling to him. Once
     when he looked up his eye caught the bluff towering over the valley and he remembered with an
     incredulous shock that it was only yesterday that he and his wife, stretched out on the turf,
     had watched the galloping of the ants of soldiers beneath it—that it was not a day since they
     had listened indifferently to the mutter of guns in the distance and talked with superior
     detachment of manoeuvres and the folly of militarism. Side by side on the short-cropped turf
     they had watched unmoved and listened without misgiving. Only yesterday—nay, only this morning
     when the sun rose—the world was the world and not hell.
He knew though, engrossed by his private agony, he did not give it much heed, that all the
     afternoon there was heavy traffic on the road that ran through the village, traffic going this
     way and that; now and again through the clatter of the work around him its rumble came to his
     ears. Noisy cars went by and heavy guns, regiments of infantry and once or twice a company of
     swift-moving horse that sped westward in a flurry of dust. As the hot, industrious hours
     crawled by even his terror for Griselda was swallowed up in the numbing and all-pervading sense
     of bodily exhaustion and ill-being, in the consciousness of throbbing head, parched mouth and
     miserable back. At midday when the captives were doled out a ration of meat and bread he lay
     like a log for the little space during which he was allowed to rest; and, resting, he dreaded
     from the bottom of his soul the inevitable call back to work. With it all was the hopeless, the
     terrifying sense of isolation; he was removed even from his fellow-sufferers, held apart from
     them not only by the barrier of their alien speech but by his greater feebleness and greater
     physical suffering. Only once during those sun-smitten and aching hours did he feel himself
     akin to any of the men around him—when a flat-capped, sturdy young German soldier, taking pity
     on his manifest unfitness for the work, muttered some good-natured, incomprehensible
     encouragement and handed him a bottle to drink from. The sharp taste of beer was a liquid
     blessing to William's dry tongue and parched throat; he tilted the bottle and drank in great
     gulps till he choked; whereat the flat-capped German boy-soldier laughed consumedly but not
     unkindly.
It must have been well on in the afternoon—for the shadows were beginning to lengthen though
     the sun burned hotly as ever—when over the noises of the toil around him and over the rumble of
     traffic on the road the persistent beat of guns became loud enough to make itself noticeable.
     All day William had heard it at intervals; during his brief rest at midday it had been frequent
     but distant; now it had spurted into sudden nearness and was rapid, frequent, continuous. A
     little group of his fellow-toilers looked up from their work as they heard the sound, drew
     closer together and exchanged mutterings till an order checked them sharply; and even after the
     order was rapped out one square-shouldered, brown-faced countryman continued to stare down the
     valley with stubbornly determined eyes.
William's eyes followed the countryman's, and for a moment saw nothing but what he had seen
     before—cliffs, the river and the hot blue sky, without a feather of cloud to it; then,
     suddenly, away down the valley, there puffed out a ball of white smoke, and before it had faded
     another. The man with the stubborn eyes grunted something beneath his breath and turned again
     to his work; William, continuing to gaze curiously at the bursting puffs, was reminded of his
     duties by a louder shout and the threat of a lifted arm. He, too, bent again and with haste to
     his work; to look up furtively as the thunder deepened and see always those bursts of floating
     cloud down the valley or against the hot horizon.
He knew, or rather guessed, in after days when his sublime ignorance of all things military
     had been tempered by the newspapers, by daily war-talk and by actual contact with the soldier,
     that the sudden appearance of those bursting puffs had indicated some temporary and local check
     to the advancing German divisions, that a French or Belgian force must have pushed or fought
     its way across the triangular plateau between the Meuse and its tributary; must have driven
     before them the Germans in the act of occupying it, must have brought up their guns and
     commanded for the moment a stretch of the lateral valley and the line of communications along
     it. It was not left long in unmolested possession thereof; nearer guns answered it swiftly from
     all directions, from other heights and from the valley; shells whined overhead, from time to
     time the ground shook, and it dawned upon William, as he looked and listened, that what he saw
     was a battle.
At first he was more impressed by the thought than he was by the actuality—since the effects
     of the conflict were not in the beginning terrible. True there was something threatening in the
     near-by thudding of a German battery when first it made itself heard. But such harm as it
     inflicted was unseen by William, and for the space of an hour or so it drew no returning fire
     and the village stood untouched and undamaged. But as the evening drew in the thunder deepened
     and quickened; both sides, it would seem, had brought up reinforcements, and guns opened fire
     from new and unexpected places, from heights, from behind garden walls. Down the road along
     which William had been urged with ungentleness by Heinz a gun-team clattered and jingled at
     breakneck speed; it pulled up close to the railway line, not fifty yards from the spot where
     the prisoners were working in the shadow of a clump of young trees; the gun was placed swiftly
     in position, the horses were led away and after a momentary interval the men began to
     fire—steadily, swiftly, on the order. William watched them with his mouth wide open till
     reminded smartly of his idleness; they were so swift, precise and machine-like. It required an
     effort of the imagination to remember what they were doing.
"Killing," he said to himself, "those men are killing!" And he found himself wondering what
     their faces looked like while they killed? Whether they liked doing it? ...
He supposed later (when that first ignorance of things military was a little less sublime)
     that the firing from the immediate neighbourhood of the village had at first inflicted but
     little damage on the opposing forces on the heights; at any rate it remained practically
     unanswered till close upon sunset, the French or Belgian gunners concentrating their fire upon
     enemies nearer, more aggressive, or more vulnerably placed. Perhaps (he never knew for certain)
     they had got the better, for the time being, of those other more aggressive or more vulnerable
     opponents; perhaps they had received reinforcements which had enabled them to push higher up
     the valley or had at last been punished by a fire hitherto ineffectual; whatever the cause, as
     the sun grew red to the westward, a first shell screamed on to the dusty road outside the
     village and burst in a pother of smoke and flying clods. William heard the burst and saw the
     cloud rise; he was still round-eyed when another shell screamed overhead to find its billet in
     a garden wall a few yards behind the battery, scattering the stones thereof and splintering the
     boughs of an apple-tree. A shower of broken fragments came pattering about the station; William
     was perhaps too much stupefied by pain and weariness to understand the extent of his danger but
     several of his fellows stirred uneasily and two of them threw down their spades and started in
     headlong flight. They were brought up swiftly by the threat of a bayonet in their path; one of
     them came back sullenly dumb, the other whimpering aloud with a hand pressed to his face.
     William saw that his cheek was bleeding where a flying fragment had caught it. He was looking
     at the man as he nursed his torn face and bemoaned himself when a third shell struck what
     remained of the station roof.
William did not know whether he fell on his face instinctively or was thrown by the force of
     the explosion; he remembered only that as he scrambled to his feet, half-deafened and crying
     for help, he saw through a settling cloud of dust the disappearing backs of some three or four
     men who were all of them running away from him. He was seized with a mortal terror of being
     left alone in this torment of thunder and disaster; he believed he must be hurt, perhaps hurt
     to the death, and a pang of rage and self-pity went through him at the thought of his desertion
     by his fellows. He started after the vanishing backs, calling out to them to wait, abusing and
     appealing, and stumbling over ruin as he ran. The distant gunners had found their enemies'
     range, and he had not made half a dozen yards when he ducked to the threat of another shell
     that burst, as he thought, close beside him. He cringed and shivered for a moment, covering his
     eyes with his hands; then, finding himself uninjured, darted off at an angle, still shielding
     his eyes and gasping out, "God, oh God—for mercy's sake, oh God!" He knew in every fibre of his
     trembling body that he was about to die, and his prayer was meant not only for himself but for
     Griselda. As he ran on blindly, an animal wild and unreasoning, a hand caught him above the
     ankle and he screamed aloud with rage and terror at finding himself held fast.
"Let me go," he cried struggling; then, as the hand still gripped, bent down to wrest himself
     free and looked into a face that he knew—a young plump face with a budding moustache surmounted
     by a flat German cap. It was twisted now into a grin of agony, but all the same he recognized
     the face of the German boy-soldier who had dealt kindly with him that afternoon in the matter
     of the bottle of beer. He was lying on his back and covered from the middle downwards with a
     litter of broken beam and ironwork blown away from the ruin of the station. The effect of the
     recognition on William was curiously and instantly sobering; he was no longer alone in the hell
     where the ground reeled and men ran from him; he was no longer an animal wild and unreasoning,
     but a man with a definite human relationship to the boy lying broken at his feet. He began to
     lift the wreckage from the crushed legs and talked as he did so, forgetting that the wounded
     man in all likelihood understood not a word of his English.
"All right, I'll get it off, I'll help you. You were good to me giving me a drink, so I'll
     stay and help you. Otherwise I oughtn't to wait, not a minute—you see, I must look for my wife.
     My first duty is to her—she's my wife and I don't know where she is. But I won't leave you like
     this because of what you did for me this afternoon." He wrenched and tugged at the shattered
     and entangled wreckage till the boy shrieked aloud in his torment—the cry terrified William and
     he desisted, wringing his hands. "I'm sorry, I'm sorry, but I couldn't help it. God knows I
     didn't mean to hurt you and if I could be gentler I would, but it's so damnably, damnably
     heavy. Oh God, if some one would come and help me, if someone would only come! You see it's so
     heavy I can't move it without hurting you."
He explained and apologized to ears that heard not for the boy had fainted in his pain; his
     deep unconsciousness made extrication easier and William tugged again at the lumber until he
     had tugged it away. One of the wounded man's leg's was a wrenched and bloody mass; William
     shuddered at the sight, looked down stupidly at the dead white face and wondered what was to be
     done—then, feeling that something must at least be tried, put his arms round the inert body and
     strove to lift it from the ground. The only results were breathlessness on his part and a groan
     from the unconscious German. William dropped him instantly on hearing the groan, trembling at
     the idea of inflicting yet more suffering, torn by the thought of Griselda, longing to go and
     yet ashamed to leave the boy-soldier without aid. He might have hesitated longer but a for
     fresh explosion and crash of falling masonry; it was followed by a long-drawn screaming
     intolerable to hear—an Aie, Aie, Aie of unspeakable bodily pain. With a sudden sense of being
     hunted, being driven beyond endurance, William turned and shook his impotent fists in the
     direction of the unseen guns. "Can't you stop one moment?" he screamed idiotically, hating them
     and dancing with rage. "Can't you stop, you devils—you devils! Don't you see I'm only trying to
     help him?" If he had ever made any distinction between friend and enemy artillery, he had lost
     all idea of it now; the guns for the moment were a private persecution of himself, and he was
     conscious only of being foully and brutally bullied by monstrous forces with whom he argued and
     at whom he cursed and spat.
It was the sight of what had once been a horse that brought him again to his senses. His eye
     fell on it as he danced in his mad ineptitude at the side of the helpless German; it had been
     one of the team that galloped a gun down the by-road and was now a pulp of raw flesh, crushed
     bone, and most hideously scattered entrail. He stared for a moment at the horror, incredulous
     and frozen—then sickened, turned and ran from it in a passion of physical loathing.
For a minute or two he ran he knew not whither—straight ahead, anywhere to be away from the
     horror; then, as his shuddering sickness passed, there rushed back the thought of Griselda, and
     he reproached himself that he had halted even for a moment and even for a purpose of mercy; all
     his energies both of mind and body were turned to the finding of his wife. They must die, he
     was sure of it; he prayed only that they died together. The way he had taken lay outside the
     walled gardens between the village and the railway line; and as he ran he called her—"Griselda,
     Griselda!"—in a voice that he hardly caught himself, so persistent was the uproar of the guns.
     When he fled from the neighbourhood of the dismembered horse he had left behind him the path
     leading directly to the main street of the village—which it was his aim to reach since there he
     had last seen Griselda. Seeking another way to it, he halted when he came to a door in the
     wall, wrestled with the latch and flung himself angrily against it; it resisted, locked, and he
     ran on again, still panting out his wife's dear name. Twenty yards further on he came to
     another door in the wall and this time it opened to his hand.
In the garden beyond was no sign of the chaos that had overwhelmed his world since the
     morning. An orderly border of orderly flowers, espaliered walls and a tree or two ruddy with
     apples; and on a shaven plot of the greenest grass an empty basket chair with beside it a white
     cat reposing with her paws tucked under her chin. The white cat may have been deaf, or she may
     have been merely intrepid; whatever the cause her nerves were unaffected by the fury of
     conflict and she dozed serenely under shell-fire, the embodiment of comfortable dignity. She
     opened a warily observant eye when William rushed into her garden; but being a well-fed cat,
     and accustomed to deference, she took no further precaution. She stirred not even when he
     hurried past her to her dwelling-house, and as he entered it by an open window her nose
     descended to rest on her folded paws.
The room he ran into through the open window left no impression on the mind of William Tully;
     it was dark after the sunlight outside, and he supposed it must have been empty. He went
     rapidly along the short passage beyond it, making for the front door; he met no one, heard no
     one, and his fingers were touching the latch when he saw, through an open door to the right of
     him, the figure of a kneeling woman. She was stout, dressed in black and grey-headed and she
     knelt leaning on a chair in the middle of the polished floor; her eyes were closed, her lips
     moved, and her hands were clasped under her chin. The sound of William's feet did not reach her
     through the tumult of fighting without, nor did he stay to disturb her. When he lived in the
     world and not hell it would have seemed to him strange and unfitting that he should intrude on
     an old woman's privacy and secret prayer; now nothing was strange, nothing unfitting or
     impossible.... He supposed that she was the white cat's mistress, noted without emotion that
     her cheeks were wet with tears and thought vaguely that her face was familiar, that he had seen
     it somewhere before. Afterwards it came to him that he had seen it when the hostages died in
     the morning, that it was she who had prayed in the road with folded hands and pressed her
     crucifix to the mayor's long grey moustache. He wondered, then, what became of her and her
     well-fed indifferent cat.
That was afterwards, many weeks afterwards; for the time being he had no interest to give
     her, his thoughts were only of Griselda and the means by which she might be found. His plan, so
     far as it could be called a plan, was to run from house to house in the village street until he
     came to the place where she was captive; but when he stepped into the road it was to find it
     impossible of passage by reason of the men and vehicles that choked the stretch in front of
     him. Almost opposite the door he came through, a motor-ambulance, going eastward with its load,
     had collided with an ammunition wagon going west, thus bringing to a standstill more ammunition
     wagons and a battery of horse-artillery, its foremost ranks thrown back in confusion by a
     threatening skid of the ambulance. There was much whistling, and shouting of orders in the
     attempt to reform and clear the road; horses reared from the suddenness with which they were
     pulled up and men ran to their heads to steady them. While the locked wheels were wrestled
     with, a bandaged bloody face peered round the tail of the ambulance; the press swayed to and
     fro, filling the road from side to side, and William, unable to move, flattened back against
     the door from which he had issued, out of reach of the wicked heels of a restive horse. For the
     first moment he expected some one to seize and arrest him, and had he not unthinkingly closed
     the door behind him he would have beat a hasty retreat; but there was bloodier and busier work
     on hand than the corraling of stray civilians, and no man touched or questioned him as he
     pressed himself against the neat green-painted door. Struggling with their own most urgent
     concerns, not a soldier so much as noticed him; and it was borne in on William that if the
     wicked heels had caught him and kicked his life out, not a man would have noticed that
     either.
Further down the street was a cloud of slowly rising black smoke—and suddenly through it a
     banner of flame leaped up and waved triumphantly; one of the tidy two-storied houses had been
     set afire by a shell. As William watched the resplendent flare the crowd round the two vehicles
     composed itself into something like order, and the ambulance—its driver, by the excited
     movements of his mouth, still shouting out angry explanations—was backed from the path of the
     advancing troops and thrust crippled against the wall. The guns on one side of the road, the
     wagons on the other stirred forward—at first slowly, then, as the line straightened itself out,
     with a rattle of increasing speed. As they passed the house afire the smoke rolled down on them
     and hid them from William's sight.
</div></body></text></TEI>