
CHAPTER VII.

                                          —Pray, good shepherd, what
Fair swain is this that dances with your daughter?

He sings several tunes faster than you'll tell money; he utters them as he had eaten
      ballads, and all men's ears grow to his tunes.—
Winter's Tale.
It was a glorious day in June, the sky of pure deep dazzling blue, the sunshine
      glowing with brightness, but with cheerful freshness in the air that took away all sultriness,
      the sun tending westward in his long day's career, and casting welcome shadows from the tall
      firs and horse-chestnuts that shaded the lawn. A long rank of haymakers—men and
      women—proceeded with their rakes, the white shirt-sleeves, straw bonnets, and ruddy faces,
      radiant in the bath of sunshine, while in the shady end of the field were idler haymakers
      among the fragrant piles, Charles half lying on the grass, with his back against a tall
      hay-cock; Mrs. Edmonstone sitting on another, book in hand; Laura sketching the busy scene,
      the sun glancing through the chequered shade on her glossy curls; Philip stretched out at full
      length, hat and neck-tie off, luxuriating in the cool repose after a dusty walk from
      Broadstone; and a little way off, Amabel and Charlotte pretending to make hay, but really
      building nests with it, throwing it at each other, and playing as heartily as the heat would
      allow.
They talked and laughed, the rest were too hot, too busy, or too sleepy for conversation,
      even Philip being tired into enjoying the dolce far niente; and they basked
       in the fresh breezy heat and perfumy hay with only now and then a word, till a
      cold black, damp nose was suddenly thrust into Charles's face, a red tongue began licking him;
      and at the same moment Charlotte, screaming 'There he is!' raced headlong across the swarths
      of hay to meet Guy, who had just ridden into the field. He threw Deloraine's rein to one of
      the haymakers, and came bounding to meet her, just in time to pick her up as she put her foot
      into a hidden hole, and fell prostrate.
In another moment he was in the midst of the whole party, who crowded round and welcomed him
      as if he had been a boy returning from his first half-year's schooling; and never did little
      schoolboy look more holiday-like than he, with all the sunshine of that June day reflected, as
      it were, in his glittering eyes and glowing face, while Bustle, escaping from Charles's
      caressing arm, danced round, wagging his tail in ecstacy, and claiming his share of the
      welcome. Then Guy was on the ground by Charles, rejoicing to find him out there, and then,
      some dropping into their former nests on the hay, some standing round, they talked fast and
      eagerly in a confusion of sound that did not subside for the first ten minutes so as to allow
      anything to be clearly heard. The first distinct sentence was Charlotte's 'Bustle, darling old
      fellow, you are handsomer than ever!'
'What a delicious day!' next exclaimed Guy, following Philip's example, by throwing off hat
      and neck-tie.
'A spontaneous tribute to the beauty of the day,' said Charles.
'Really it is so ultra-splendid as to deserve notice!' said Philip, throwing himself
      completely back, and looking up.
'One cannot help revelling in that deep blue!' said Laura.
'To-morrow'll be the happiest time of all the glad new year,' hummed Guy.
'Ah! you will teach us all now,' said Laura, 'after your grand singing lessons.'

'Do you know what is in store for you, Guy!' said Amy. 'Oh! haven't you heard about Lady
      Kilcoran's ball!'
'You are to go, Guy,' said Charlotte. 'I am glad I am not. I hate dancing.'
'And I know as much about it as Bustle,' said Guy, catching the dog by his forepaws, and
      causing him to perform an uncouth dance.
'Never mind, they will soon teach you,' said Mrs. Edmonstone.
'Must I really go?'
'He begins to think it serious,' said Charles.
'Is Philip going?' exclaimed Guy, looking as if he was taken by surprise.
'He is going to say something about dancing being a healthful recreation for young people,'
      said Charles.
'You'll be disappointed,' said Philip. 'It is much too hot to moralize.'
'Apollo unbends his bow,' exclaimed Charles. 'The captain yields the field.'
'Ah! Captain Morville, I ought to have congratulated you,' said Guy. 'I must come to
      Broadstone early enough to see you on parade.'
'Come to Broadstone! You aren't still bound to Mr. Lascelles,' said Charles.
'If he has time for me,' said Guy. 'I am too far behind the rest of the world to afford to
      be idle this vacation.'
'That's right, Guy,' exclaimed Philip, sitting up, and looking full of approval. 'With so
      much perseverance, you must get on at last. How did you do in collections?'
'Tolerably, thank you.'
'You must be able to enter into the thing now,' proceeded Philip. 'What are you
      reading?'
'Thucydides.'
'Have you come to Pericles' oration? I must show you some notes that I have on that. Don't
      you get into the spirit of it now?'

'Up hill work still,' answered Guy, disentangling some cliders from the silky curls
      of Bustle's ear.
'Which do you like best—that or the ball?' asked Charles.
'The hay-field best of all,' said Guy, releasing Bustle, and blinding him with a heap of
      hay.
'Of course!' said Charlotte, 'who would not like haymaking better than that stupid
      ball?'
'Poor Charlotte!' said Mrs. Edmonstone, commiseration which irritated Charlotte into
      standing up and protesting, 'Mamma, you know I don't want to go.'
'No more do I, Charlotte,' said her brother, in a mock consoling tone. 'You and I know what
      is good for us, and despise sublunary vanities.'
'But you will go, Guy,' said Laura; 'Philip is really going.'
'In spite of Lord Kilcoran's folly in going to such an expense as either taking Allonby or
      giving the ball,' said Charles.
'I don't think it is my business to bring Lord Kilcoran to a sense of his folly,' said
      Philip. 'I made all my protests to Maurice when first he started the notion, but if his father
      chose to take the matter up, it is no concern of mine.'
'You will understand, Guy,' said Charles, 'that this ball is specially got up by Maurice for
      Laura's benefit.
'Believe as little as you please of that speech, Guy,' said Laura; 'the truth is, that Lord
      Kilcoran is very good-natured, and Eveleen was very much shocked to hear that Amy had never
      been to any ball, and I to only one, and so it ended in their giving one.'
'When is it to be?'
'On Thursday week,' said Amy. 'I wonder if you will think Eveleen as pretty as we do!'
'She is Laura's great friend, is not she?'
'I like her very much; I have known her all my life, and she has much more depth than those
      would think who only know her manner.' And Laura looked pleadingly at Philip as she spoke.

'Are there any others of the family at home?' said Guy.
'The two younger girls, Mabel and Helen, and the little boys,' said Amy. 'Lord de Courcy is
      in Ireland, and all the others are away.
'Lord de Courcy is the wisest man of the family, and sets his face against absenteeism,'
      said Philip, 'so he is never visible here.'
'But you aren't going to despise it, I hope, Guy, said Amy, earnestly; 'it will be so
      delightful! And what fun we shall have in teaching you to dance!'
Guy stretched himself, and gave a quaint grunt.
'Never mind, Guy,' said Philip, 'very little is required. You may easily pass in the crowd.
      I never learnt.'
'Your ear will guide you,' said Laura.
'And no one can stay at home, since Mary Ross is going,' said Amy. 'Eveleen was always so
      fond of her, that she came and forced a promise from her, by telling her she should come with
      mamma, and have no trouble.'
'You have not seen Allonby,' said Laura. 'There are such Vandykes, and among them, such a
      King Charles!'
'Is not that the picture,' said Charles, 'before which Amy—'
'O don't, Charlie!'
'Was found dissolved in tears?'
'I could not help it,' murmured Amy, blushing crimson.
'There is all Charles's fate in his face,' said Philip,— 'earnest, melancholy, beautiful! It
      would stir the feelings—were it an unknown portrait. No, Amy, you need not be ashamed of your
      tears.'
But Amy turned away, doubly ashamed.
'I hope it is not in the ball-room,' said Guy.
'No,' said Laura, 'it is in the library.'
Charlotte, whose absence had become perceptible from the general quietness, here ran up with
      two envelopes, which she put into Guy's hand. One was Lady Kilcoran's
       genuine card of invitation for Sir Guy Morville, the other Charlotte had
      scribbled in haste, for Mr. Bustle.
This put an end to all rationality. Guy rose with a growl and a roar, and hunted her over
      half the field, till she was caught, and came back out of breath and screaming, 'We never had
      such a haymaking!'
'So I think the haymakers will say!' answered her mother, rising to go indoors. 'What ruin
      of haycocks!'
'Oh, I'll set all that to rights,' said Guy, seizing a hayfork.
'Stop, stop, take care!' cried Charles. 'I don't want to be built up in the rick, and
      by-and-by, when my disconsolate family have had all the ponds dragged for me, Deloraine will
      be heard to complain that they give him very odd animal food!'
'Who could resist such a piteous appeal?' said Guy, helping him to rise, and conducting him
      to his wheeled chair. The others followed, and when, shortly after, Laura looked out at her
      window, she saw Guy, with his coat off, toiling, like a real haymaker, to build up the cocks
      in all their neat fairness and height, whistling meantime the 'Queen of the May,' and now and
      then singing a line. She watched the old cowman come up, touching his hat, and looking less
      cross than usual; she saw Guy's ready greeting, and their comparison of the forks and rakes,
      the pooks and cocks of their counties; and, finally, she beheld her father ride into the
      field, and Guy spring to meet him.
No one could have so returned to what was in effect a home, unless his time had been
      properly spent; and, in fact, all that Mr. Edmonstone or Philip could hear of him was so
      satisfactory, that Philip pronounced that the first stage of the trial had been passed
      irreproachably, and Laura felt and looked delighted at this sanction to the high estimation in
      which she held him.
His own account of himself to Mrs. Edmonstone would not have been equally satisfactory if
      she had not had something else to check it with. It was
       given by degrees, and at many different times, chiefly as they walked round the
      garden in the twilight of the summer's evenings, talking over the many subjects mentioned in
      the letters which had passed constantly. It seemed as if there were very few to whom Guy would
      ever give his confidence; but that once bestowed, it was with hardly any reserve, and that it
      was his great relief and satisfaction to pour out his whole mind, where he was sure of
      sympathy.
To her, then, he confided how much provoked he was with himself, his 'first term,' he said,
      'having only shown him what an intolerable fool he had to keep in order.' By his account, he
      could do nothing 'without turning his own head, except study, and that stupified it.' 'Never
      was there a more idle fellow;' he could work himself for a given time, but his sense would not
      second him; and, was it not most absurd in him to take so little pleasure in what was his
      duty, and enjoy only what was bad for him?'
He had tried boating, but it had distracted him from his work; so he had been obliged to
      give it up, and had done so in a hasty, vehement manner, which had caused offence, and for
      which he blamed himself. It had been the same with other things, till he had left himself no
      regular recreation but walking and music. 'The last,' he said, 'might engross him in the same
      way; but he thought (here he hesitated a little) there were higher ends for music, which made
      it come under Mrs. Edmonstone's rule, of a thing to be used guardedly, not disused.' He had
      resumed light reading, too, which he had nearly discontinued before he went to Oxford. 'One
      wants something,' he said, 'by way of refreshment, where there is no sea nor rock to look at,
      and no Laura and Amy to talk to.'
He had made one friend, a scholar of his own college, of the name of Wellwood. This name had
      been his attraction; Guy was bent on friendship with him; if, as he tried to make him out to
      be, he was the son of that Captain Wellwood, whose death had weighed so
       heavily on his grandfather's conscience, feeling almost as if it were his duty
      to ask forgiveness in his grandfather's name, yet scarcely knowing how to venture on advances
      to one to whom his name had such associations. However, they had gradually drawn together, and
      at length entered on the subject, and Guy then found he was the nephew, not the son of Captain
      Wellwood; indeed, his former belief was founded on a miscalculation, as the duel was
      twenty-eight years ago. He now heard all his grandfather had wished to know of the family.
      There were two unmarried daughters, and their cousin spoke in the highest terms of their
      self-devoted life, promising, what Guy much wished, that they should hear what deep repentance
      had followed the crime which had made them fatherless. He was to be a clergyman, and Guy
      admired him extremely, saying, however, that he was so shy and retiring, it was hard to know
      him well.
From not having been at school, and from other causes, Guy had made few acquaintance;
      indeed, he amused Mrs. Edmonstone by fearing he had been morose. She was ready to tell him he
      was an ingenious self-tormentor; but she saw that the struggle to do right was the main spring
      of the happiness that beamed round him, in spite of his self reproach, heart-felt as it was.
      She doubted whether persons more contented with themselves were as truly joyous, and was
      convinced that, while thus combating lesser temptations, the very shadow of what are generally
      alone considered as real temptations, would hardly come near him.
If it had not been for these talks, and now and then a thoughtful look, she would have
      believed him one of the most light-hearted and merriest of beings. He was more full of glee
      and high spirits than she had ever seen him; he seemed to fill the whole house with mirth, and
      keep every one alive by his fun and frolic, as blithe and untiring as Maurice de Courcy
      himself, though not so wild.
Very pleasant were those summer days—reading,
       walking, music, gardening. Did not they all work like very labourers at the new
      arbour in the midst of the laurels, where Charles might sit and see the spires of Broadstone?
      Work they did, indeed! Charles looking on from his wheeled chair, laughing to see Guy sawing
      as if for his living, and Amy hammering gallantly, and Laura weaving osiers, and Charlotte
      flying about with messages.
One day, they were startled by an exclamation from Charles. 'Ah, ha! Paddy, is that you?'
      and beheld the tall figure of a girl, advancing with a rapid, springing step, holding up her
      riding habit with one hand, with the other, whisking her coral-handled whip. There was
      something distinguished in her air, and her features, though less fine than Laura's, were very
      pretty, by the help of laughing dark blue eyes, and very black hair, under her broad hat and
      little waving feather. She threatened Charles with her whip, calling out—'Aunt Edmonstone said
      I should find you here. What is the fun now?'
'Arbour building,' said Charles; 'don't you see the head carpenter?'
'Sir Guy?' whispered she, to Laura, looking up at him, where he was mounted on the roof,
      thatching it with reed, the sunshine full on his glowing face, and white shirt sleeves.
'Here!' said Charles, as Guy swung himself down with a bound, his face much redder than sun
      and work had already made it, 'here's another wild Irisher for you.'
'Sir Guy Morville—Lady Eveleen de Courcy,' began Laura; but Lady Eveleen cut her short,
      frankly holding out her hand, and saying 'You are almost a cousin, you know. Oh, don't leave
      off. Do give me something to do. That hammer, Amy, pray—Laura, don't you remember how dearly I
      always loved hammering?'
'How did you come?' said Laura.
'With Papa—'tis his visit to Sir Guy. No, don't go,' as Guy began to look for his coat; 'he
      is only impending.
       He is gone on to Broadstone, but he dropped me here, and will pick me up on his
      way back. Can't you give me something to do on the top of that ladder? I should like it
      mightily; it looks so cool and airy.'
'How can you. Eva?' whispered Laura, reprovingly; but Lady Eveleen only shook her head at
      her, and declaring she saw a dangerous nail sticking out, began to hammer it in with such good
      will, that Charles stopped his ears, and told her it was worse than her tongue. 'Go on about
      the ball, do.'
'Oh,' said she, earnestly. 'do you think there is any hope of Captain Morville's
      coming?'
'Oh yes,' said Laura.
'I am so glad! That is what papa is gone to Broadstone about. Maurice said he had given him
      such a lecture, that he would not be one to think of asking him, and papa must do it himself,
      for if he sets his face against it, it will spoil it all.'
'You may make your mind easy,' said Charles. 'the captain is lenient, and looks on the ball
      as a mere development of Irish nature. He has been consoling Guy on the difficulties of
      dancing.'
'Can't you dance?' said Lady Eveleen, looking at him with compassion.
'Such is my melancholy ignorance,' said Guy.
'We have been talking of teaching him,' said Laura.
'Talk! will that do it?' cried Lady Eveleen, springing up. 'We will begin this moment. Come
      out on the lawn. Here, Charles,' wheeling him along. 'No, thank you, I like it,' as Guy was
      going to help her. 'There, Charles, be fiddler; go on, tum—tum, tee; that'll do. Amy, Laura,
      be ladies. I'm the other gentleman,' and she stuck on her hat in military style, giving it a
      cock. She actually set them quadrilling in spite of adverse circumstances, dancing better, in
      her habit, than most people without one, till Lord Kilcoran arrived.
While he was making his visit, she walked a little
       apart, arm in arm with Laura. 'I like him very much,' she said; 'he looks up to
      anything. I had heard so much of his steadiness, that it is a great relief to my mind to see
      him so unlike his cousin.'
'Eveleen!'
'No disparagement to the captain, only I am so dreadfully afraid of him. I am sure he thinks
      me such an unmitigated goose. Now, doesn't he?'
'If you would but take the right way to make him think otherwise, dear Eva, and show the
      sense you really have.'
'That is just what my fear of him wont let me do. I would not for the world let him guess
      it, so there is nothing for it but sauciness to cover one's weakness. I can't be sensible with
      those that won't give me credit for it. But you'll mind and teach Sir Guy to dance; he has so
      much spring in him, he deserves to be an Irishman.
In compliance with this injunction, there used to be a clearance every evening; Charles
      turned into the bay window out of the way, Mrs. Edmonstone at the piano, and the rest figuring
      away, the partnerless one, called 'puss in the corner,' being generally Amabel, while
      Charlotte, disdaining them all the time, used to try to make them imitate her dancing-master's
      graces, causing her father to perform such caricatures of them as to overpower all with
      laughing.
Mr. Edmonstone was half, Irish. His mother, Lady Mabel Edmonstone, had never thoroughly
      taken root in England, and on his marriage, had gone with her daughter, to live near the old
      home in Ireland. The present Earl of Kilcoran was her nephew, and a very close intercourse had
      always been kept up between the families, Mr. and Mrs. Edmonstone being adopted by their
      younger cousins as uncle and aunt, and always so called.
The house at Allonby was in such confusion, that the family there expected to dine nowhere
      on the day
       of the ball; and the Hollywell party thought it prudent to secure their dinner
      at home, with Philip and Mary Ross, who were to go with them.
By special desire, Philip wore his uniform; and while the sisters were dressing, Charlotte
      gave him a thorough examination, which led to a talk between him and Mary on accoutrements and
      weapons in general; but while deep in some points of chivalrous armour, Mary's waist was
      pinched by two mischievous hands, and a little fluttering white figure danced round her.
'O Amy! what do you want with me?'
'Come and be trimmed up,' said Amy.
'I thought you told me I was to have no trouble. I am dressed,' said Mary, looking
      complacently at her full folds of white muslin.
'No more you shall; but you promised to do as you were told.' And Amy fluttered away with
      her.
'Do you remember,' said Philip, 'the comparison of Rose Flammock dragging off her father, to
      a little carved cherub trying to uplift a solid monumental hero?'
'O, I must tell Mary!' cried Charlotte; but Philip stopped her, with orders not to be a
      silly child.
'It is a pity Amy should not have her share,' said Charles.
'The comparison to a Dutch cherub?' asked Guy.
'She is more after the pattern of the little things on little wings, in your blotting-book,'
      said Charles; 'certain lines in the predicament of the cherubs of painters —heads et
      præterea nihil .'
'O Guy, do you write verses?' cried Charlotte.
'Some nonsense,' muttered Guy, out of countenance; 'I thought I had made away with that
      rubbish; where is it?'
'In the blotting-book in my room,' said Charles. 'I must explain that the book is my
      property, and was put into your room when mamma was beautifying it for you, as new and strange
      company. On its return to me, at your departure, I discovered a great accession
       of blots and sailing-vessels, besides the aforesaid little things.'
'I shall resume my own property,' said Guy, departing in haste.
Charlotte ran after him, to beg for a sight of it; and Philip asked Charles what it was
      like?
'A romantic incident,' said Charles, 'just fit for a novel. A Petrarch leaving his poems
      about in blotting-books.'
Charles used the word Petrarch to stand for a poet, not thinking what lady's name it
      suggested; and he was surprised at the severity of Philip's tone as he inquired,
'Do you mean anything, or do you not?'
Perceiving with delight that he had perplexed and teazed, he rejoiced in keeping up the
      mystery:
'Eh? is it a tender subject with you, too?'
Philip rose, and standing over him, said, in a low but impressive tone:
'I cannot tell whether you are trifling or not; but you are no boy now, and can surely see
      that this is no subject to be played with. If you are concealing anything you have discovered,
      you have a great deal to answer for. I can hardly imagine anything more unfortunate than that
      he should become attached to either of your sisters?'
'Et pourquoi?' asked Charles, coolly.
'I see,' said Philip, retreating to his chair, and speaking with great composure, 'I did you
      injustice by speaking seriously.' Then, as his uncle came into the room, he asked some
      indifferent question, without betraying a shade of annoyance.
Charles meanwhile congratulated himself on his valour in keeping his counsel, in spite of so
      tall a man in scarlet; but he was much nettled at the last speech; for if a real attachment to
      his sister had been in question, he would never have trifled about it. Keenly alive to his
      cousin's injustice, he rejoiced in having provoked and mystified the impassible, though he
      little
       knew the storm he had raised beneath that serene exterior of perfect
      self-command.
The carriages were announced, and Mr. Edmonstone began to call the ladies, adding tenfold to
      the confusion in the dressing-room. There was Laura being completed by the lady's-maid, Amabel
      embellishing Mary, Mrs. Edmonstone with her arm loaded with shawls, Charlotte flourishing
      about. Poor Mary—it was much against her will—but she had no heart to refuse the wreath of
      geraniums that Amy's own hands had woven for her; and there she sat, passive as a doll, though
      in despair at their all waiting for her. For Laura's toilette was finished, and every one
      began dressing her at once; while Charlotte, to make it better, screamed over the balusters
      that all were ready but Mary. Sir Guy was heard playing the 'Harmonious Blacksmith,' and
      Captain Morville's step was heard, fast and firm. At last, when a long chain was put round her
      neck, she cried out, 'I have submitted to everything so far; I can bear no more!' jumped up,
      caught hold of her shawl, and was putting it on, when there was a general outcry that they
      must exhibit themselves to Charles.
They all ran down, and Amy, flying up to her brother, made a splendid sweeping curtsey, and
      twirled round in a pirouette.
'Got up regardless of expense!' cried Charles; 'display yourselves.'
The young ladies ranged themselves in imitation of the book of fashions. The sisters were in
      white, with wreaths of starry jessamine. It was particularly becoming to Laura's bella-donna
      lily complexion, rich brown curls, and classical features; and her brother exclaimed:
'Laura is exactly like Apollo playing the lyre, outside mamma's old manuscript book of
      music.'
'Has not Amy made beautiful wreaths?' said Laura. 'She stripped the tree, and Guy had to
      fetch the ladder, to gather the sprays on the top of the wall.'

'Do you see your bit of myrtle, Guy,' said Amy, pointing to it, on Laura's head, 'that you
      tried to persuade me would pass for jessamine?'
'Ah! it should have been all myrtle,' said Guy.
Philip leant meantime against the door. Laura only once glanced towards him, thinking all
      this too trifling for him, and never imagining the intense interest with which he gave a
      meaning to each word and look.
'Well done, Mary!' cried Charles, 'they have furbished you up handsomely.'
Mary made a face, and said she should wonder who was the fashionable young lady she should
      meet in the pier-glasses at Allonby. Then Mr. Edmonstone hurried them away, and they arrived
      in due time.
The saloon at Allonby was a beautiful room, one end opening into a conservatory, full of
      coloured lamps, fresh green leaves, and hot-house plants. There they found as yet only the
      home party, the good-natured, merry Lord Kilcoran, his quiet English wife, who had bad health,
      and looked hardly equal to the confusion of the evening; Maurice, and two younger boys;
      Eveleen, and her two little sisters, Mabel and Helen.
'This makes it hard on Charlotte,' thought Amy, while the two girls dragged her off to show
      her the lamps in the conservatory; and the rest attacked Mrs. Edmonstone for not having
      brought Charlotte, reproaching her with hardness of heart of which they had never believed her
      capable—Lady Eveleen, in especial, talking with that exaggeration of her ordinary manner which
      her dread of Captain Morville made her assume. Little he recked of her; he was absorbed in
      observing how far Laura's conduct coincided with Charles's hints. On the first opportunity, he
      asked her to dance, and was satisfied with her pleased acquiescence; but the next moment, Guy
      came up, and in an eager manner made the same request.
'I am engaged,' said, she, with a bright, proud glance at Philip; and Guy pursued Amabel
      into the conservatory, where he met with better success. Mr. Edmonstone
       gallantly asked Mary if he was too old a partner, and was soon dancing, with the
      step and spring that had once made him the best dancer in the county.
Mrs. Edmonstone watched her flock, proud and pleased, thinking how well they looked, and
      that, in especial, she had never been sensible how much Laura's and Philip's good looks
      excelled the rest of the world. They were much alike in the remarkable symmetry both of figure
      and feature, the colour of the deep blue eye, and fairness of complexion.
'It is curious,' thought Mrs. Edmonstone, 'that, so very handsome as Philip is, it is never
      the first thing remarked about him, just as his height never is observed till he is compared
      with other people. The fact is, that his superior sense carries off a degree of beauty which
      would be a misfortune to most men. It is that sedate expression and distinguished air that
      make the impression. How happy Laura looks, how gracefully she moves. No, it is not being
      foolish to think no one equal to Laura. My other pair!' and she smiled much more, 'you happy
      young things, I would not wish to see anything pleasanter than your merry faces. Little Amy
      looks almost as pretty as Laura, now she is lighted up by blush and smile, and her dancing is
      very nice; it is just like her laughing, so quiet, and yet so full of glee. I don't think she
      is less graceful than her sister, but the complete enjoyment strikes one more. And as to
      enjoyment—there are those bright eyes of her partner's perfectly sparkling with delight; he
      looks as if it was a world of enchantment to him. Never had any one a greater capacity for
      happiness than Guy!'
Mrs. Edmonstone might well retain her opinion when, after the quadrille, Guy came to tell
      her that he had never seen anything so delightful; and he entertained Mary Ross with his
      fresh, joyous pleasure, through the next dance,
'Laura,' whispered Eveleen, 'I've one ambition. Do you guess it? Don't tell him; but if he
      would, I
       should have a better opinion of myself ever after. I'm afraid he'll depreciate
      me to his friend; and really with Mr. Thorndale, I was no more foolish than a ball
      requires.'
Lady Eveleen hoped in vain. Captain Morville danced with little Lady Helen, a child of
      eleven, who was enchanted at having so tall a partner; then, after standing still for some
      time, chose his cousin Amabel.
'You are a good partner and neighbour,' said he, giving her his arm, 'you don't want young
      lady talk.'
'Should you not have asked Mary? She has been sitting down this long time.'
'Do you think she cares for such a sport as dancing?'
Amy made no answer.
'You have been well off. You were dancing with Thorndale just now.'
'Yes. It was refreshing to have an old acquaintance among so many strangers. And he is so
      delighted with Eveleen; but what is more, Philip, that Mr. Vernon, who is dancing with Laura,
      told Maurice he thought her the prettiest and most elegant person here.'
'Laura might have higher praise,' said Philip, 'for hers is beauty of countenance even more
      than of feature. If only—'
'If?' said Amy.
'Look round, Amy, and you will see many a face which speaks of intellect wasted, or if
      cultivated, turned aside from its true purpose, like the double blossom, which bears leaves
      alone.'
'Ah! you forget you are talking to silly little Amy. I can't see all that. I had rather
      think people as happy and good as they look.'
'Keep your child-like temper as long as you can— all your life, perhaps, for this is one of
      the points where it is folly to be wise.'
'Then you only meant things in general. Nothing about Laura?'

'Things in general,' repeated Philip; 'bright promises blighted or thrown away—'
But he spoke absently, and his eye was following Laura.
Amy thought he was thinking of his sister, and was sorry for him. He spoke no more, but she
      did not regret it, for she could not moralize in such a scene, and the sight and the dancing
      were pleasure enough.
Guy, in the meantime, had met an Oxford acquaintance, who introduced him to his
      sisters—pretty girls— whose father Mr. Edmonstone knew, but who was rather out of the
      Hollywell visiting distance. They fell into conversation quickly, and the Miss Alstons asked
      him with some interest, 'Which was the pretty Miss Edmonstone?' Guy looked for the sisters, as
      if to make up his mind, for the fact was, that when he first knew Laura and Amy the idea of
      criticising beauty had not entered his mind, and to compare them was quite a new notion.
      'Nay,' said he at last, 'if you cannot discover for yourselves when they are both before your
      eyes, I will do nothing so invidious as to say which is the pretty one. I'll tell
      which is the eldest and which the youngest, but the rest, you must decide for yourself.'
'I should like to know them,' said Miss Alston. 'Oh! they are both very nice-looking
      girls.'
'There, that is Laura—Miss Edmonstone,' said Guy, 'that tall young lady, with the beautiful
      hair and jessamine wreath.'
He spoke as if he was proud of her, and had a property in her. The tone did not escape
      Philip, who at that moment was close to them, with Amy on his arm; and, knowing the Alstons
      slightly, stopped and spoke, and introduced his cousin, Miss Amabel Edmonstone. At the same
      time Guy took one of the Miss Alstons away to get some tea.
'So you knew my cousin at Oxford?' said Philip, to the brother.
'Yes, slightly. What an amusing fellow he is!'

'There is something very bright, very unlike other people about him,' said Miss Alston.
'How does he get on? Is he liked?'
'Why, yes, I should say so, on the whole; but it is rather as my sister says, he is not like
      other people.'
'In what respect?'
'Oh! I can hardly tell. He is a very pleasant person, but he ought to have been at school.
      He is a man of crotchets.'
'Hard-working?'
'Very; he makes everything give way to that. He is a capital companion when he is to be had,
      but he lives very much to himself. He is a man of one friend, and I don't see much of
      him.'
Another dance began, Mr. Alston went to look for his partner, Philip and Amy moved on in
      search of ice. 'Hum!' said Philip to himself, causing Amy to gaze up at him, but he was musing
      too intently for her to venture on a remark. She was thinking that she did not wonder that
      strangers deemed Guy crotchety, since he was so difficult to understand; and then she
      considered whether to take him to see King Charles, in the library, and concluded that she
      would wait, for she felt as if the martyr king's face would look on her too gravely to suit
      her present tone.
Philip helped her to ice, and brought her back to her mother's neighbourhood, without many
      more words. He then stood thoughtful for some time, entered into conversation with one of the
      elder gentlemen, and, when that was interrupted, turned to talk to his aunt.
Lady Eveleen and her two cousins were for a moment together. 'What is the matter, Eva?' said
      Amy, seeing a sort of dissatisfaction on her bright face.
'The roc's egg?' said Laura, smiling. 'The queen of the evening can't be content—'
'No; you are the queen, if the one thing can make you so—the one thing wanting to me.'

'How absurd you are, Eva—when you say you are so afraid of him, too.'
'That is the very reason. I should get a better opinion of myself! Besides, there is nobody
      else so handsome. I declare I'll make a bold attempt.'
'Oh! you don't think of such a thing,' cried Laura, very much shocked.
'Never fear,' said Eveleen, 'faint heart, you know.' And with a nod, a flourish of her
      bouquet, and an arch smile at her cousin's horror, she moved on, and presently they heard her
      exclaiming, gaily, 'Captain Morville, I really must scold you. You are setting a shocking
      example of laziness! Aunt Edmonstone, how can you encourage such proceedings! Indolence is the
      parent of vice, you know.'
Philip smiled just as much as the occasion required, and answered, 'I beg your pardon, I had
      forgotten my duty. I'll attend to my business better in future.' And turning to a small, shy
      damsel, who seldom met with a partner, he asked her to dance. Eveleen came back to Laura with
      a droll disappointed gesture. 'Insult to injury,' said she, disconsolately.
'Of course,' said Amy, 'he could not have thought you wanted to dance with him, or you would
      not have gone to stir him up.'
'Well, then, he was very obtuse!'
'Besides, you are engaged.'
'O yes, to Mr. Thorndale! but who would be content with the squire when the knight disdains
      her?'
Mr. Thorndale came to claim Eveleen at that moment. It was the second time she had danced
      with him, and it did not pass unobserved by Philip, nor the long walk up and down after the
      dance was over. At length his friend came up to him, and said something warm in admiration of
      her. 'She is very Irish,' was Philip's answer, with a cold smile, and Mr. Thorndale stood
      uncomfortable under the disapprobation, attracted by Eveleen's beauty and grace, yet so unused
      to trust
       his own judgment apart from 'Morville's,' as to be in an instant doubtful
      whether he really admired or not.
'You have not been dancing with her?' he said, presently.
'No—she attracts too many to need the attention of a nobody like myself.'
That 'too many,' seeming to confound him with the vulgar herd, made Mr. Thorndale heartily
      ashamed of having been pleased with her.
Philip was easy about him for the present, satisfied that admiration had been checked,
      which, if it had been allowed to grow into an attachment, would have been very
      undesirable.
The suspicions Charles had excited were so full in Philip's mind, however, that he could not
      as easily set it at rest respecting his cousin. Guy had three times asked her to dance, but
      each time she had been engaged. At last, just as the clock struck the hour at which the
      carriage had been ordered, he came up and impetuously claimed her. 'One quadrille we must
      have, Laura! if you are not tired?'
'No! O no! I could dance till this time to-morrow.'
'We ought to be going,' said Mrs. Edmonstone.
'O pray, Mrs. Edmonstone, this one more,' cried Guy, eagerly. 'Laura owes me this one!'
'Yes, this one more, mamma,' said Laura, and they went off together, while Philip remained,
      in a reverie, till requested by his aunt to see if the carriage was ready.
The dance was over, the carriage was waiting, but Guy and Laura did not appear till, after
      two or three minutes spent in wonder and inquiries, they came quietly walking back from the
      library, where they had been looking at King Charles.
All the way home the four ladies in their carriage never ceased laughing and talking. The
      three gentlemen in theirs acted diversely. Mr. Edmonstone went to sleep, Philip sat in silent
      thought, Guy whistled and
       hummed the tunes, and moved his foot very much as if he was still dancing.
They met for a moment, and parted again in the hall at Hollywell, where the daylight was
      striving to get in through the closed shutters. Philip went on to Broadstone, Guy said he
      could not go to bed by daylight, called Bustle, and went to the river to bathe, and the rest
      crept up-stairs to their rooms. And so ended Lord Kilcoran's ball.

