
CHAPTER XVI.

The coldness from my heart is gone,
   But still the weight is there,
And thoughts which I abhor will come
   To tempt me to despair.
Southey. 
Amabel's one anxiety was for Philip. For a long time nothing was heard of him at Hollywell,
      and she began to fear that he might have been less fit to take care of himself, than he had
      persuaded her to believe. When at length tidings reached them, it was through the De Courcys.
      "Poor Morville," wrote Maurice, "had been carried ashore at Corfu, in the stupor of a second
      attack of fever. He had been in extreme danger for some time, and though now on the mend, was
      still unable to give any account of himself."
In effect, it was a relapse of the former disease, chiefly affecting the brain, and his
      impatience to leave Recoara, and free himself from Arnaud had been a symptom of its approach,
      though it fortunately did not absolutely overpower him till after he had embarked for Corfu,
      and was in the way to be tended with the greatest solicitude. Long after the fever was
      subdued, and his strength returning, his mind was astray; and even, when torturing delusions
      ceased, and he resumed the perception of surrounding objects, memory and reflection wavered in
      dizzy confusion, more distressing than either his bodily weakness, or the perpetual pain in
      his head, which no remedy could relieve.

The first date to which he could afterwards recur, though for more than a week he had
      apparently been fully himself, was a time when he was sitting in an easy chair by the window,
      obliged to avert his heavy eyes from the dazzling waters of the Corcyran bay, where Ulysses'
      transformed ship gleamed in the sunshine, and the rich purple hills of Albania sloped upwards
      in the distance. James Thorndale was, as usual, with him, and was explaining that there had
      been a consultation between the doctor and the colonel, and they had decided that as there was
      not much chance of restoring his health in that climate in the spring—
'Spring!' he interrupted with surprise and eagerness. 'Is it spring?'
'Hardly—except that there is no winter here. This is the 8th of January.'
He let his head fall on his hand again, and listened with indifference when told he was to
      be sent to England at once, under the care of his servant, Bolton, and Mr. Thorndale himself,
      who was resolved to see him safe in his sister's hands. He made no objection; he had become
      used to be passive, and one place was much the same to him as another; so he merely assented,
      without a question about the arrangements. Presently, however, he looked up, and inquired for
      his letters. Though he had done so before, the request had always been evaded, until now he
      spoke in a manner which decided his friend on giving him all except one with broad black
      edges, and Broadstone post-mark; the effect of which, it was thought, might be very injurious
      to his shattered nerves and spirits.
However, he turned over the other letters without interest, just glancing languidly through
      them, looked disappointed, and exclaimed, 'None from Hollywell! Has nothing been heard from
      them? Thorndale, I insist on knowing whether De Courcy has heard anything of Lady
      Morville.'
'He has heard of her arrival in England.'
'My sister mentions that—more than two months
       ago—I can hardly believe she has not written, if she was able. She promised, yet
      how can I expect'— then interrupting himself, he added authoritatively, 'Thorndale, is there
      no letter for me? I see there is. Let me have it.'
His friend could not but comply, and had no reason to regret having done so; for after
      reading it twice, though he sighed deeply, and the tears were in his eyes, he was more calm
      and less oppressed than he had been at any time since his arrival in Corfu. He was unable to
      write, but Colonel Deane had undertaken to write to Mrs. Henley to announce his coming, and as
      the cause of his silence must be known at Hollywell, he resolved to let Amabel's letter wait
      for a reply till his arrival in England.
It was on a chilly day in February that Mrs. Henley drove to the station to meet her
      brother, looking forward with a sister's satisfaction to nursing his recovery, and feeling
      (for she had a heart after all) as if it was a renewal of the days which she regarded with a
      tenderness mixed with contempt, when all was confidence between the brother and sister, the
      days of nonsense and romance. She hoped that now poor Philip, who had acted hastily on his
      romance, and ruined his own prospects for her sake in his boyish days, had a chance of having
      it all made up to him, and reigning at Redclyffe according to her darling wish.
As she anxiously watched the arrival of the train, she recognised Mr. Thorndale, whom she
      had known in his school-days as Philip's protégé, but could that be her brother? It was his
      height, indeed, but his slow weary step, as he crossed the platform, and left the care of his
      baggage to others, was so unlike his prompt, independent air, that she could hardly believe it
      to be himself, till, with his friend, he actually advanced to the carriage, and then she saw
      far deeper traces of illness than she was prepared for. A confusion of words took place;
      greetings on one hand, and partings on the other, for James Thorndale was going on by the
      train,
       and only a few minutes' halt in which to assure Mrs Henley that though the
      landing and the journey had knocked up his patient to-day, he was much better since leaving
      Corfu, and to beg Philip to write as soon possible. The bell rang, he rushed back, and was
      whirled away.
'Then you are better,' said Mrs. Henley, anxiously surveying her brother. 'You are sadly
      altered! You must let us take good care of you.'
'Thank you! I knew you would be ready to receive me, though I fear I am not very good
      company.'
'Say no more, my dearest brother. You know both Dr. Henley and myself have made it our first
      object that our house should be your home.'
'Thank you.'
'This salubrious air must benefit you,' she added. 'How thin you are! Are you very much
      fatigued?'
'Rather,' said Philip, who was leaning back wearily; but the next moment he exclaimed, 'What
      do you hear from Hollywell?'
'There is no news yet.'
'Do you know how she is? When did you hear of her?'
'About a week ago; when she wrote to inquire for you.'
'She did? What did she say of herself?'
'Nothing particular, poor little thing; I believe she is always on the sofa. My aunt would
      like nothing so well as making a great fuss about her.'
'Have you any objection to show me her letter?' said Philip, unable to bear hearing Amabel
      thus spoken of, yet desirous to learn all he could respecting her.
'I have not preserved it,' was the answer. 'My correspondence is so extensive that there
      would be no limit to the accumulation if I did not destroy the trivial letters.'
There was a sudden flush on Philip's pale face that caused his sister to pause in her
      measured, self-satisfied speech, and ask if he was in pain.

'No,' he replied shortly, and Margaret pondered on his strange manner, little guessing what
      profanation her mention of Amabel's letter had seemed to him, or how it jarred on him to hear
      this exaggerated likeness of his own self-complacent speeches.
She was much shocked and grieved to see him so much more unwell than she had expected. He
      was unfit for anything but to go to bed on his arrival. Dr. Henley said the system had
      received a severe shock, and it would be long before the effects would be shaken off; but that
      there was no fear but his health would be completely restored if he would give himself entire
      rest.
There was no danger that Margaret would not lavish care enough on her brother. She waited on
      him in his room all the next day, bringing him everything he could want, and trying to make
      him come down stairs, for she thought sitting alone there very bad for his spirits; but he
      said he had a letter to write, and very curious she was to know why he was so long doing it,
      and why he did not tell her to whom it was addressed. However, she saw when it was put into
      the post-bag, that it was for Lady Morville.
At last, too late to see any of the visitors who had called to inquire, when the evening had
      long closed in, she had the satisfaction of seeing Philip enter the drawing-room, and settling
      him in the most comfortable of her easy chairs on one side of the fire to wait till the doctor
      returned for dinner. The whole apartment, was most luxurious, spacious, and richly furnished,
      the fire, in its brilliant steel setting, glancing on all around, and illuminating her own
      stately presence, and rich glacé silk, as she sat opposite her brother cutting open the leaves
      of one of the books of the club over which she presided. She felt that this was something like
      attaining one of the objects for which she used to say and think she married,—namely, to be
      able to receive her brother in a comfortable home. If only he would but look more like
      himself.

'Do you like a cushion for your head, Philip? Is it better?'
'Better since morning, thank you.'
'Did those headachs come on before your second illness?'
'I can't distinctly remember.'
'Ah! I cannot think how the Edmonstones could leave you. I shall always blame them for that
      relapse.'
'It had nothing to do with it. Their remaining was impossible.'
'On Amabel's account? No, poor thing, I don't blame her, for she must have been quite
      helpless; but it was exactly like my aunt, to have but one idea at a time. Charles used to be
      the idol, and now it is Amy, I suppose.'
'If anything could have made it more intolerable for me, it would have been detaining them
      there for my sake, at such a time.'
'Ah! I felt a great deal for you. You must have been very sorry for that poor little Amy.
      She was very kind in writing while you were ill. How did she contrive, poor child? I suppose
      you took all the head work for her?'
'I? I was nothing but a burden.'
'Were you still so very ill?' said Margaret, tenderly. 'I am sure you must have been
      neglected.'
'Would that I had!' muttered Philip, so low that she did not catch the words. Then
      aloud,—'No care could have been greater than was taken for me. It was as if no one had been
      ill but myself, and the whole thought of every one had been for me.'
'Then Amabel managed well, poor thing? We do sometimes see those weak soft characters'—
'Sister!' he interrupted.
'Have not you told me so yourself?'
'I was a fool, or worse,' said he, in a tone of suffering. 'No words can describe what she
      proved herself.'
'Self-possessed? energetic?' asked Mrs. Henley, with whom these were the first of qualities;
      and as
       her brother paused from repugnance to speak of Amabel to one so little capable
      of comprehending her, she proceeded: 'No doubt she did the best she could, but she must have
      been quite inexperienced. It was a very young thing in the poor youth to make her executrix. I
      wonder the will was valid; but I suppose you took care of that.'
'I did nothing.'
'Did you see it?'
'My uncle showed it to me.'
'Then you can tell me what I want to hear, for no one has told me anything. I suppose my
      uncle is to be guardian.'
'No; Lady Morville.'
'You don't mean it? Most lover-like indeed. That poor girl to manage that great property!
      Everything left to her?' said Mrs. Henley, continuing her catechism in spite of the
      unwillingness of his replies. 'Were there any legacies?'
'I know of Miss Wellwood's, that to Dixon's daughter, and my own,' he answered.
'Yours? How was it that I never heard of it? What is it?'
'Ten thousand,' said Philip, sadly.
'I am delighted to hear it!' cried Margaret. 'Very proper of Sir Guy—very proper indeed,
      poor youth. It is well thought of to soften the disappointment.'
Philip started forward. 'Disappointment!' exclaimed he, with horror.
'You need not look as if I wished to commit murder,' said his sister, smiling. 'Have you
      forgotten that it depends on whether it is a son or daughter?'
His dismay was not lessened. 'Do you mean to say that this is to come on me if the child is
      a daughter?'
'Ah! you were so young when the entail was made, that you knew nothing of it. Female heirs
      were expressly excluded. There was some aunt whom old Sir Guy passed over, and settled the
      property on my father and you, failing his own male heirs.'

'No one would take advantage of such a chance,' said Philip.
'Do not make any rash resolutions, my dear brother, whatever you do,' said Margaret. 'You
      have still the same fresh romantic generous spirit of self-sacrifice that is generally so soon
      worn out, but you must not let it allow you'—
'Enough of this,' said Philip, hastily, for every word was a dagger.
'Ah! you are right not to dwell on the uncertainty. I am almost sorry I told you,' said
      Margaret. 'Tell me about Miss Wellwood's legacy,' she continued, desirous of changing the
      subject. 'I want to know the truth of it, for every one is talking of it.'
'How comes the world to know of it?'
'There have been reports ever since his death, and now it has been paid, whatever it is, on
      Lady Morville's coming of age. Do you know what it is? The last story I was told was, that it
      was £20,000, to found a convent to pray for his grand—'
'Five thousand for her hospital,' interrupted Philip. 'Sister!' he added, speaking with
      effort, 'it was for that hospital that he made the request for which we —persecuted him.'
'Ah! I thought so. I could have told you so!' cried Margaret, triumphant in her sagacity,
      but astonished, as her brother started up and stood looking at her, as if he could hardly
      resolve to give credit to her words. 'You—thought—so,' he repeated slowly.
'I guessed it from the first. He was always with that set, and I thought it a very bad thing
      for him; but as it was only a guess, it was not worth while to mention it: besides, the cheque
      seemed full evidence. It was the general course, not the individual action.'
'If you thought so, why not mention it to me? Oh! sister, what would you not have spared
      me!'
'I might have done so if it had appeared that it might lead to his exculpation; but you were
      so fully convinced that his whole course confirmed the suspicions,
       that a mere vague idea was not worth dwelling on. Your general opinion of him
      satisfied me.'
'I cannot blame you,' was all his reply, as he sat down again, with his face averted from
      the light.
And Mrs. Henley was doubtful whether he meant that she had been judicious! She spoke again,
      unconscious of the agony each word inflicted.
'Poor youth! we were mistaken in those facts, and of course, all is forgiven and forgotten
      now; but he certainly had a tremendous temper. I shall never forget that exhibition! Perhaps
      poor Amabel is saved much unhappiness.'
'Once for all,' said Philip, sternly, 'let me never hear you speak of him thus. We were both
      blind to a greatness of soul and purity of heart that we shall never meet again. Yours was
      only prejudice; mine, I must call by a darker name. Remember, that he and his wife are only to
      be spoken of with reverence.'
He composed himself to silence; and Margaret, after looking at him for some moments in
      wonder, began in a sort of exculpatory tone:
'Of course we owe him a great deal of gratitude. It was very kind and proper to come to you
      when you were ill, and his death must have been a terrible shock. He was a fine young man;
      amiable, very attractive in manner.'
'No more!' muttered Philip.
'That, you always said of him,' continued she, not hearing; 'but you have no need to
      reproach yourself. You always acted the part of a true friend; did full justice to his many
      good qualities, and only sought his real good.'
'Every word you speak is the bitterest satire on me,' said Philip, goaded into rousing
      himself for a moment. 'Say no more, unless you would drive me distracted!'
Margaret was obliged to be silent, and marvel, while her brother sat motionless, leaning
      back in his chair till Dr. Henley came in; and, after a few words to him, went on talking to
      his wife, till dinner was announced.
       Philip went with them into the diningroom, but had scarcely sat down before he
      said he could not stay, and returned to the drawing-room sofa. He said he only wanted quiet
      and darkness, and sent his sister and her husband back to their dinner.
'What has he been doing?' said the Doctor; 'here is his pulse up to a hundred again. How can
      he have raised it?'
'He only came down an hour ago, and has been sitting still ever since.'
'Talking?'
'Yes; and there, perhaps, I was rather imprudent. I did not know he could so little bear to
      hear poor Sir Guy's name mentioned; and besides, he did not know, till I told him, that he had
      so much chance of Redclyffe. He did not know the entail excluded daughters.'
'Did he not? That accounts for it. I should like to see the man who could hear coolly that
      he was so near such a property. This suspense is unlucky just now; very much against him. You
      must turn his thoughts from it as much as possible.'
All the next day, Mrs. Henley wondered why her brother's spirits were so much depressed,
      resisting every attempt to amuse or cheer them; but, on the third, she thought some light was
      thrown on the matter. She was at breakfast with the doctor when the post came in, and there
      was a black-edged letter for Captain Morville, evidently from Amabel. She took it up at once
      to his room. He stretched out his hand for it eagerly, but laid it down, and would not open it
      while she was in the room.
The instant she was gone, however, he broke the seal and read:
Hollywell, February 20th.
My dear Philip .—Thank you much for writing to me. It was a great comfort to see
      your writing again, and to hear of your being safe in our own country. We had been very
      anxious about you, though we did not hear of your illness till the worst was over. I am
       very glad you are at St. Mildred's, for I am sure Margaret must be very careful
      of you, and Stylehurst air must be good for you. Every one here is well; Charles growing
      almost active, and looking better than I ever saw him. I wish I could tell you how nice and
      quiet a winter it has been; it has been a great blessing to me in every way, so many things
      have come to me to enjoy. Mr. Ross has come to me every Sunday, and often in the week, and has
      been so very kind. I think talking to him will be a great pleasure to you when you are here
      again. You will like to hear that Mr. Shene has sent me the picture, and the pleasure it gives
      me increases every day. Indeed, I am so well off in every way, that you must not grieve
      yourself about me, though I thank you very much for what you say. Laura reads to me all the
      evening from dinner to tea. I am much better than I was in the winter, and am enjoying the
      soft spring air from the open window, making it seem as if it was much later in the year.
Good by, my dear cousin; may God bless and comfort you. Remember, that after all it was
      God's will, not your doing; and therefore, as he said himself, all is as it should be, and so
      it will surely be.
Your affectionate cousin,
Amabel F. Morville.
Childishly simple as this letter might be called, with its set of facts without comment, and
      the very commonplace words of consolation; it spoke volumes to Philip of the spirit in which
      it was written, resignation, pardon, soothing, and a desire that her farewell, perhaps her
      last, should carry with it a token of her perfect forgiveness. Everything from Amabel did him
      good, and he was so perceptibly better, that his sister exclaimed, when she was next alone
      with Dr. Henley, 'I understand it all, poor fellow; I thought long ago he had some secret
      attachment, and now I see it was to Amabel Edmonstone.'

'To Lady Morville?'
'Yes. You know how constantly he was at Hollywell, my aunt so fond of him! I don't suppose
      Amy knew of it; and, of course, she could not be blamed for accepting such an offer as Sir
      Guy's; besides, she never had much opinion of her own.'
'How? No bad speculation for him. She must have a handsome jointure; but what are your
      grounds?'
'Everything. Don't you remember he would not go to the marriage? He mentions her almost like
      a saint; can't hear her name from any one else—keeps her letter to open alone, is more revived
      by it than by anything else. Ah! depend upon it, it was to avoid her, poor fellow, that he
      refused to go to Venice with them.'
'Their going to nurse him is not as if Sir Guy suspected it.'
'I don't suppose he did, nor Amy either. No one ever had so much power over himself.'
Philip would not have thanked his sister for her surmise, but it was so far in his favour
      that it made her avoid the subject, and he was thus spared from hearing much of Amabel or of
      Redclyffe. It was bad enough without this. Sometimes in fairy tales, a naughty child, under
      the care of a fairy, is chained to an exaggeration of himself and his own faults, and rendered
      a slave to this hateful self. The infliction he underwent in his sister's house was somewhat
      analogous; for Mrs. Henley's whole character, and especially her complacent speeches, were a
      strong resemblance of his own in the days he most regretted. He had, ever since her marriage,
      regarded her as a man looks at a fallen idol; but never had her alteration been so clear to
      him, as he had not spent much time with her, making her short visits, and passing the chief of
      each day at Stylehurst. Now, he was almost entirely at her mercy, and her unvarying kindness
      to him caused her deterioration to pain him all the more;
       while each self-assertion, or harsh judgment, sounded on his ear like a
      repetition of his worst and most hateful presumption. She little guessed what she made him
      endure, for he had resumed his wonted stoicism of demeanour, though the hardened crust that
      had once grown over his feelings had been roughly torn away, leaving an extreme soreness and
      tenderness to which an acute pang was given whenever he was reminded, not only of his injuries
      to Guy, but of the pride and secret envy that had been their root.
At the same time, he disappointed her by his continued reserve and depression. The
      confidence she had forfeited was never to be restored, and she was the last person to know how
      incapable she was of receiving it, or how low she had sunk in her self-exaltation.
He was soon able to resume the hours of the family, but was still far from well; suffering
      from languor, pain in the head, want of sleep and appetite; and an evening feverishness. He
      was unequal to deep reading, and was in no frame for light books; he could not walk far, and
      his sister's literary coteries, which he had always despised, were at present beyond his
      powers of endurance. She hoped that society would divert his thoughts and raise his spirits,
      and arranged her parties with a view to him; but he never could stay long in the room, and Dr.
      Henley, who, though proud of his wife and her talents, had little pleasure in her learned
      circle, used to aid and abet his escape.
Thus Philip got through the hours as best he might; idly turning the pages of new
      club-books, wandering on the hills till he tired himself; sitting down to rest in the damp
      air, coming home chilled and fatigued, and lying on the sofa with his eyes shut, to avoid
      conversation, all the evening. Neither strength, energy, nor intellect would serve him for
      more; and this, with the load and the stings of a profound repentance, formed his history
      through the next fortnight.

He used often to stand gazing at the slowly rising walls of Miss Wellwood's buildings, and
      the only time he exerted himself in his old way to put down any folly in conversation, was
      when he silenced some of the nonsense talked about her, and evinced his own entire approval of
      her proceedings.

