<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Domitia by Sabine Baring-Gould</title><author>Baring-Gould, Sabine (1834-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1898</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">

CHAPTER XI.THE VEILS OF ISHTAR.
 Domitia did not go into the house, as desired, to receive Lamia. 
 She was well aware that he would come to her into the garden, if she did not present
      herself within, and she preferred to speak with him away from her mother. 
 She therefore continued to walk under the vines. She looked up at the sunlight filtering
      through the broad green flaky shade, with here and there a ray kissing a purple, pendent bunch
      of grapes. 
 Then she looked at the dreaming peacock, the sun flashing on its metallic plumage. 
 No! matter was not evil. Matter, indeed, without life was not even like the statue—for that
      was a copy of what lived, and failed just in this, that it fell short of life. Domitia felt as
      though she were touching the edge of a great verity, but had not set her foot upon it. Then
      she considered what Euphrosyne had said to her, and she to her slave. Wherever the path of
      duty lay, there violets bloomed and verbena scented the air. Was not life itself, devoid of
      the knowledge of its purport, and its obligations and its destiny, like matter uninformed by
      Life? Or if any life entered into it, it was the disintegrating life of decay and
      decomposition? 
 She, for her part, had no obligations laid on her.
      If, however, she were married to Lamia, then at once duties would spring up, and
      her way would be rosy. Till then her happiness hung in suspense, like that of her mother,
      during the period of widowhood in which she was expected and required to live in retirement.
      Out of society, not elbowing and shouldering her way forward—that was a year of blank and of
      unhappiness to Longa Duilia, in which she found no consolation save in badgering her steward,
      and in scheming for the future. 
 Lamia, as Domitia expected he would, came to her under the trellis, and she received him
      with that dimple in her cheek which gave her expression so much sweetness mingled with pathos, 
 “Lucius,” she said, “you are good to come. My mother is, oh! so dull, and restless withal.” 
 “It is well that she should be away from Rome, my Domitia. I have told her as much. On no
      account must you leave Gabii. Rome is boiling over, and will scald many fingers. None know who
      will be up to-morrow, and which down. Galba is dead, almost torn to pieces by those who
      worshipped him yesterday. Otho is proclaimed by the Senate. Yet there is fresh trouble brewing
      and threats sound from the provinces. Methinks every general at the head of an army is
      marching upon Rome to snatch the purple for his own shoulders. Otho has but a poor chance. He
      can command the prætorians and the household troops—none others. Soldiers that
      have disbanded themselves and gangs of robbers prowl the streets, waylay men of substance and
      plunder them, break into houses and strip them of their contents. Murders are frequent. Thus
      far your palace in the Carinæ is undisturbed.” 

 “Oh, Lucius! my mother has so fretted over that house, as it stands back, and makes no show
      behind its bank of yews and laurels, and yet those evergreens, I believe, saved it in the
      fire. She says that the house is unworthy of our dignity.” 
 “You may rejoice that it is so in such times of anarchy. Order in the city is now at an
      end, none are safe unless attended by armed slaves; and, by the Gods! no man is quite safe
      even from his own slaves.” 
 “What did my mother say to that?” 
 “She sighed and said—” there was a twinkle in Lamia’s eye, “that she was glad the
      disturbances were taking place now, as at no time could they have happened so happily, when
      she was obliged to live in retirement.” 
 “Lucius, what do you think will be the end?” 
 “That the gods alone can tell. At present the soldiers are masters in the State, and the
      Senate proclaims whomsoever they set up. Rome is dishonored in the face of the Barbarians.” 
 “What think you, my Lucius,—shall we ask the Chaldee if he can unveil the future?” 
 “Not of the State, Domitia, that were too dangerous. Women have lost their lives, or been
      banished on such a charge. No, do not risk it.” 
 “Nay, Lucius, like my mother, the State concerns me only so far as its affairs affect my
      own silly little interests. But I do want to know something of my future. Elymas is reputed to
      look into destiny. He hath glimpses beyond the strain of a philosopher’s eye. I have offended
      him by my quips and objections, and would humor him now by asking him to read in the
      stars, or where he will, what the gods have in store for me.” 
 “I believe not in such vision.” 
 “Nor I greatly, Lucius. Yet I heard say that he had prognosticated evil on the day my dear
      father set foot in Cenchræa.” 
 “It needed no prophet to foretell that.” 
 “Shall we seek him, Lucius?” 
 “As you will. I will attend thee. Only, no questions relative to the prince, as to his
      life, his reign, his health. No questions concerning the State—promise me that.” 
 “It shall be so, Lucius. Come with me to the Temple of Isis. He is there.” 
 The two young people walked to a small shrine or ædiculum at the extremity of a terrace
      above the lake. 
 In the colonnade in front of the door was the Magus. He was out of humor, offended at his
      treatment by Domitia. His sole satisfaction was that Senecio, the Stoic, was placed below him
      in her estimation. 
 Now the girl went up to him, with a pretty, winning smile, and said: 
 “Sir! I fear me greatly that I gave you occasion to think I held your theories cheaply.
      Indeed it is not so, they are too weighty to be dismissed at once; they take time to digest.
      There is one thing you may do for me, that I desire of you heartily, and in which I will not
      controvert your authority. It is said that the stars rule the destinies of men, and that in
      the far East, on the boundless plains of Mesopotamia, you and your people have learned to read
      them. I would fain know what the heavens have in store for me.” 
 “Indeed, lady, to consult the stars is a long and
      painful business, that I will gladly undertake, but it cannot be done hastily. It
      will require time. There are, however, other ways of reading the future than by the stars.
      There is Ishtar, whom the Egyptians call Isis, whom thou mayest consult in this temple.” 
 “I am ready.” 
 “That also cannot be undertaken at once. I must even send for my assistant Helena. It is
      not I who see, save mediately. The goddess has her chosen instrument, and such is Helena.
      Lady! Ishtar is the Truth, she has no image. She is invisible to us veiled in matter. She
      hides herself behind seven veils, or rather our eyes are so wrapped about that we cannot see
      her who is visible only in spirit. Thou knowest that in the Temple floor is a rent, and
      through that rent the breath of the gods ascends. I will place Helena over that rent, and she
      will fall into a trance, and if I say certain prayers and use certain invocations, then the
      veils will fall away, and in pure spiritual essence she will look into the face of Ishtar and
      read therein the Truth, past, present, and future. Is it your pleasure to consult the
      goddess?” 
 “Indeed I do desire it,” said Domitia. 
 “Thou hast no fear?” 
 “Fear! fear of what?” 
 “Of the future. It is well for us that the gods hide this from our eyes.” 
 Domitia turned and looked at Lamia. 
 “No,” she said with a smile, “I have no fear for my future.” 
 “That which is anticipated does not always come, but rather that which is unexpected.” 
 “Then when forewarned, one is forearmed.” 

 “If it be thy pleasure, lady, return at sunset. Then Helena shall be here, and I shall have
      made my preparations.” 
 “That is but an hour hence. Be it so. Come, Lamia. Thou shalt row me on the lake till
      Elymas call.” 
 “So be it,” said Lucius; and as they withdrew, he added, “I like that not. If it pleased
      the gods to show us what is in store, then they would reveal it to us. I mistrust me, this man
      is either an impostor or he deals with the spirits of evil.” 
 “Nay, think not so. Why should not the Truth lie behind seven veils, and if so, and we are
      able, why not pluck away those veils?” 
 “In good sooth, Domitia, thou hast more daring in thy little soul than have I.” 
 The girl and Lucius Lamia had been so much together in Syria, that they had come to regard
      each other with the affection of brother and sister. In Greek life the females occupied a
      separate portion of the house to the males, and did not partake of meals with them. There was
      no common family life. 
 Old Roman domestic arrangements had been very different from this. There the wife and
      mother occupied a place of dignity, with her daughters around her, and sat and span in the
      atrium, where also the men assembled. She prepared the meals, and partook of them with her
      husband, and the sisters with their brothers. The only difference between them at table was
      that the men reclined to eat, whereas the women sat on stools. But this home life, which had
      been so wholesome and so happy, in the luxury and wealth of the age at the fall of the
      Commonwealth and the rise
      of Imperialism, had become an element of demoralization. For the conversation of
      the men had grown shameless, the exhibitions at banquets of coarse drunkenness, and of dancing
      girls, and the singing of ribald songs by musicians, had driven away shame from the cheeks of
      the women, and corrupted the freshness of the children’s innocence. 
 Yet there were, through even the worst periods, households in which the healthy old Roman
      simplicity and familiarity between the sexes remained, good fathers and mothers who screened
      their children’s eyes from evil sights, devoted husbands and wives full of mutual reverence.
      Such had been the house of Corbulo, whether in Rome, or in Syria. He had been a strict and
      honorable soldier, and a strict and honorable father in his family. 
 Thus it was that Lucius Lamia, and Domitia had seen much of each other, and that affection
      for each other mingled with respect had grown up naturally and vigorously in their hearts. 
 And now Lucius was paddling on the glassy tarn. He used but little action. Occasionally he
      dipped the paddles, then allowed the skiff to glide forward till she ceased to be moving, when
      again he propelled her with one stroke. He was musing; so also was Domitia. 
 All at once he roused himself. 
 “Domitia,” said he, “Do you know that there is a rumor about that Nero is not dead, but has
      fled to the Parthians, and that he will return?” 
 “You do not say so!” The girl’s color died away. 
 “I do not believe it. It cannot be. The sword of your father would not bite so feebly as to
      let him live. Yet the tale is circulating. Men are uneasy—expecting something.” 
 “If he be dead and burnt, he cannot return.” 
 “No,” said Lucius, “he cannot return from the dead. And yet—there be strange rumors. Among
      the Christians, I am told, there has risen up a seer, who hath been taken with an ecstasy, and
      hath beheld wonderful visions. And this is reported, that he saw a beast arising out of the
      sea, having seven heads, and on each head a golden crown. And one of those heads, the fifth,
      received a death-wound. Then arose two other heads, and after them the wounded head arose once
      again and breathed fire and slaughter, and the second state was worse than the first.” 
 “But, Lucius, what can this signify?” 
 “They say it signifies the Empire of Rome, and that the heads are the princes, and the
      fifth head, that is wounded as unto death, but not slain, is Nero, and that after two have
      arisen, then he will return.” 
 Domitia shuddered. 
 “If he return, Lamia, he will not forget thee. Well, we will ourselves look behind the
      veils; that is better than hearing through others what some unknown prophet hath said. See, on
      the shore stands Elymas, calling us.” 
</div></body></text></TEI>