
CHAPTER III.
Lord Monmouth was sitting in the same dressing-room in which he was first
       introduced to the reader; on the table were several packets of papers that were open and in
       course of reference; and he dictated his observations to Monsieur Villebecque who was writing
       at his left hand.
Thus were they occupied, when Coningsby was ushered into the room.
"You see, Harry," said Lord Monmouth, "that I am much occupied to-day, yet the business on
       which I wish to communicate with you is so pressing that it could not be postponed." He made
       a sign to Villebecque, and his secretary instantly retired.

"I was right in pressing your return to England," continued Lord Monmouth to his grandson,
       a little anxious as to the impending communication which he could not in any way anticipate.
       "These are not times when young men should be out of sight. Your public career will commence
       immediately. The Government have resolved on a dissolution. My information is from the
       highest quarter. You may be astonished, but it is a fact. They are going to dissolve their
       own House of Commons. Notwithstanding this and the Queen's name, we can beat them; but the
       race requires the finest jockeying. We can't give a point. Tadpole has been here to me about
       Darlford; he came specially with a message, I may say an appeal, from one to whom I can
       refuse nothing; the Government count on the seat, though with the new Registration 'tis
       nearly a tie. If we had a good candidate we could win. But Rigby won't do. He is too much of
       the old clique; used up; a hack; besides a beaten horse. We are assured the name of Coningsby
       would be a host; there is a considerable section who support the present fellow, who will not
       vote
        against a Coningsby. They have thought of you as the fit person, and I have
       approved of the suggestion. You will therefore be the candidate for Darlford with my entire
       sanction and support, and I have no doubt you will be successful. You may be sure I shall
       spare nothing: and it will be very gratifying to me, after being robbed of all our boroughs,
       that the only Coningsby who cares to enter Parliament, should nevertheless be able to do so
       as early as I could fairly desire."
Coningsby the rival of Mr. Millbank on the hustings of Darlford! Vanquished or victorious,
       equally a catastrophe! The fierce passions, the gross insults, the hot blood and the cool
       lies, the ruffianism and the ribaldry, perhaps the domestic discomfiture and mortification,
       which he was about to be the means of bringing on the roof he loved best in the world,
       occurred to him with anguish. The countenance of Edith haughty and mournful as last night
       rose to him again. He saw her canvassing for her father and against him. Madness! And for
       what was he to make this terrible and costly sacrifice? For his ambition?
        Not even for that Divinity or Dæmon for which we all immolate so much! Mighty
       ambition forsooth to succeed to the Rigbys! To enter the House of Commons a slave and a tool;
       to move according to instructions, and to labour for the low designs of petty spirits;
       without even the consolation of being a dupe. What sympathy could there exist between
       Coningsby and the "great Conservative party," that for ten years in an age of revolution had
       never promulgated a principle; whose only intelligible and consistent policy seemed to be an
       attempt, very grateful of course to the feelings of an English Royalist, to revive Irish
       Puritanism; who when in power in 1835 had used that power only to evince their utter
       ignorance of Church principles; and who were at this moment, when Coningsby was formally
       solicited to join their ranks, in open insurrection against the prerogatives of the English
       Monarchy.
"Do you anticipate then an immediate Dissolution, sir?" inquired Coningsby after a moment's
       pause.
"We must anticipate it; though I think it doubtful. It may be next month; it may be
        in the autumn; they may tide over another year as Lord Eskdale thinks, and his
       opinion always weighs with me. He is very safe. Tadpole believes they will dissolve at once.
       But whether they dissolve now, or in a month's time, or in the autumn, or next year, our
       course is clear. We must declare our intentions immediately. We must hoist our flag. Monday
       next, there is a great Conservative dinner at Darlford. You must attend it; that will be the
       finest opportunity in the world for you to announce yourself."
"Don't you think, sir," said Coningsby, "that such an announcement would be rather
       premature? It is in fact embarking in a contest which may last a year; perhaps more."
"What you say is very true," said Lord Monmouth; "no doubt it is very troublesome; very
       disgusting; any canvassing is. But we must take things as we find them. You cannot get into
       Parliament now in the good old gentlemanly way; and we ought to be thankful that this
       interest has been fostered for our purpose."
Coningsby looked on the carpet, cleared his
        throat as if about to speak, and then gave something like a sigh.
"I think you had better be off the day after to-morrow," said Lord Monmouth. "I have sent
       instructions to the steward to do all he can in so short a time, for I wish you to entertain
       the principal people."
"You are most kind, you are always most kind to me, dear sir," said Coningsby in a
       hesitating tone, and with an air of great embarrassment; "but, in truth, I have no wish to
       enter Parliament."
"What?" said Lord Monmouth.
"I feel that I am not yet sufficiently prepared for so great a responsibility as a seat in
       the House of Commons," said Coningsby.
"Responsibility!" said Lord Monmouth smiling. "What responsibility is there! How can any
       one have a more agreeable seat! The only person to whom you are responsible is your own
       relation, who brings you in. And I don't suppose there can be any difference on any point
       between us. You are certainly still young; but I was younger by nearly two years when I first
       went in; and I found no difficulty.
        There can be no difficulty. All you have got to do is to vote with your party.
       As for speaking, if you have a talent that way; take my advice; don't be in a hurry. Learn to
       know the house; learn the house to know you. If a man be discreet, he cannot enter Parliament
       too soon."
"It is not exactly that, sir," said Coningsby.
"Then what is it, my dear Harry? You see to-day I have much to do; yet as your business is
       pressing, I would not postpone seeing you an hour. I thought you would have been very much
       gratified."
"You mentioned that I had nothing to do but to vote with my party, sir," replied Coningsby.
       "You mean of course by that term what is understood by the Conservative Party?"
"Of course; our friends."
"I am sorry," said Coningsby, rather pale, but speaking with firmness, "I am sorry that I
       could not support the Conservative party."
"By—" exclaimed Lord Monmouth, starting in his chair, "some woman has got hold of him, and
       made him a Whig."
"No, my dear grandfather," said Coningsby,
        scarcely able to repress a smile, serious as the interview was becoming,
       "nothing of the kind, I assure you. No person can be more Anti-Whig."
"I don't know what you are driving at, sir," said Lord Monmouth, in a hard, dry tone.
"I wish to be frank, sir," said Coningsby, "and am very sensible of your goodness in
       permitting me to speak to you on the subject. What I mean to say is, that I have for a long
       time looked upon the Conservative party as a body who have betrayed their trust; more from
       ignorance I admit than from design; yet clearly a body of individuals totally unequal to the
       exigencies of the epoch; and indeed unconscious of its real character."
"You mean giving up those Irish corporations?" said Lord Monmouth. "Well, between
       ourselves, I am quite of the same opinion. But we must mount higher; we must go to—28 for the
       real mischief. But what is the use of lamenting the past? Peel is the only man; suited to the
       times and all that,—at least we must say so, and try to believe so; we can't go back. And it
       is our own fault that we have
        let the chief power out of the hands of our own order. It was never thought of
       in the time of your great-grandfather, sir. And if a Commoner were for a season permitted to
       be the nominal Premier to do the detail, there was always a secret Committee of great 1688
       Nobles to give him his instructions."
"I should be very sorry to see secret Committees of great 1688 Nobles again," said
       Coningsby.
"Then what the devil do you want to see?" said Lord Monmouth.
"Political Faith," said Coningsby, "instead of Political Infidelity."
"Hem!" said Lord Monmouth.
"Before I support Conservative principles," continued Coningsby, "I merely wish to be
       informed what those principles aim to conserve. It would not appear to be the Prerogative of
       the Crown, since the principal portion of a Conservative oration now is an invective against
       a late royal act which they describe as a Bed-chamber plot. Is it the Church which they wish
       to conserve? What is a threatened Appropriation Clause against an actual Church Commission in
        the hands of Parliamentary Laymen? Could the Long Parliament have done worse?
       Well then, if it's neither the Crown nor the Church whose rights and privileges this
       Conservative party propose to vindicate, is it your House, the House of Lords, whose powers
       they are prepared to uphold? Is it not notorious that the very man whom you have elected as
       your leader in that House, declares among his Conservative adherents, that henceforth the
       very Assembly that used to furnish those Committees of great Revolution Nobles that you
       mention, is to initiate nothing; and without a struggle is to subside into that undisturbed
       repose which resembles the Imperial tranquillity that secured the frontiers by paying
       tribute."
"All this is vastly fine," said Lord Monmouth; "but I see no means by which I can attain my
       object but by supporting Peel. After all, what is the end of all parties and all politics? To
       gain your object. I want to turn our coronet into a Ducal one, and to get your grandmother's
       barony called out of abeyance in your favour. It is impossible that Peel can refuse me. I
       have already purchased
        an ample estate with the view of entailing it on you and your issue. You will
       make a conderable alliance; you may marry if you please Lady Theresa Sydney. I hear the
       report with pleasure. Count on my at once entering into any arrangement conducive to your
       happiness."
"My dear grandfather, you have ever been to me only too kind and generous."
"To whom should I be kind but to you; my own blood that has never crossed me, and of whom I
       have reason to be proud. Yes, Harry, it gratifies me to hear you admired and learn your
       success. All I want now is to see you in Parliament. A man should be in Parliament early.
       There is a sort of stiffness about every man, no matter what may be his talents, who enters
       Parliament late in life; and now fortunately the occasion offers. You will go down on Friday;
       feed the notabilities well; speak out; praise Peel; abuse O'Connell and the ladies of the
       Bed-chamber; anathematise all waverers; say a good deal about Ireland; stick to the Irish
       Registration Bill, that's a good card; and above all, my dear Harry, don't spare that fellow
       Millbank. Remember in turning
        him out you not only gain a vote for the Conservative Cause and our coronet,
       but you crush my foe. Spare nothing for that object; I count on you, boy."
"I should grieve to be backward in anything that concerned your interest or your honour,
       sir," said Coningsby with an air of great embarrassment.
"I am sure you would, I am sure you would," said Lord Monmouth, in a tone of some
       kindness.
"And I feel at this moment," continued Coningsby, "that there is no personal sacrifice
       which I am not prepared to make for them, except one. My interests, my affections, they
       should not be placed in the balance, if yours, sir, were at stake, though there are
       circumstances which might involve me in a position of as much mental distress as a man could
       well endure; but I claim for my convictions, my dear grandfather, a generous tolerance."
"I can't follow you, sir," said Lord Monmouth again in his hard tone. "Our interests are
       inseparable, and therefore there can never be any sacrifice of conduct on your part. What
        you mean by sacrifice of affections I don't comprehend; but as for your
       opinions, you have no business to have any other than those I uphold. You are too young to
       form opinions."
"I am sure I wish to express them with no unbecoming confidence;" replied Coningsby; "I
       have never intruded them on your ear before; but this being an occasion, when you yourself
       said, sir, I was about to commence my public career, I confess I thought it was my duty to be
       frank; I would not entail on myself long years of mortification by one of those
       ill-considered entrances into political life which so many public men have cause to
       deplore."
"You go with your family, sir, like a gentleman; you are not to consider your opinions like
       a philosopher or a political adventurer."
"Yes, sir," said Coningsby with animation, "but men going with their families, like
       gentlemen, and losing sight of every principle on which the society of this country ought to
       be established, produced the Reform Bill."
"D— the Reform Bill;" said Lord Monmouth, "if the Duke had not quarrelled with Lord Grey on
       a Coal Committee, we should
        never have had the Reform Bill. And Grey would have gone to Ireland."
"You are in as great peril now as you were in 1830," said Coningsby.
"No, no, no;" said Lord Monmouth, "the Tory party is organized now; they will not catch us
       napping again; these Conservative Associations have done the business."
"But what are they organized for?" said Coningsby. "At the best to turn out the Whigs. And
       when you have turned out the Whigs, what then? You may get your Ducal Coronet, sir. But a
       Duke now is not as great a man as a Baron was but a century back. We cannot struggle against
       the irresistible stream of circumstances. Power has left our order; this is not an age for
       factitious aristocracy. As for my grandmother's barony, I should look upon the termination of
       its abeyance in my favour, as the act of my political extinction. What we want, sir, is not
       to fashion new Dukes and furbish up old Baronies; but to establish great principles which may
       maintain the realm and secure the happiness of the People. Let me see Authority once more
       honoured; a solemn Reverence again
        the habit of our lives; let me see Property acknowledging as in the old days of
       faith, that Labour is his twin brother, and that the essence of all tenure is the performance
       of duty; let results such as these be brought about, and let me participate, however feebly,
       in the great fulfilment; and public life then indeed becomes a noble career, and a seat in
       Parliament an enviable distinction."
"I tell you what it is, Harry," said Lord Monmouth, very drily, "members of this family may
       think as they like, but they must act as I please. You must go down on Friday to Darlford and
       declare yourself a candidate for the town, or I shall re-consider our mutual positions. I
       would say, you must go to-morrow; but it is but courteous to Rigby to give him a previous
       intimation of your movement. And that cannot be done to-day. I sent for Rigby this morning on
       other business which now occupies me; and find he is out of town. He will return to-morrow;
       and will be here at three o'clock, when you can meet him. You will meet him I doubt not like
       a man of sense," added Lord Monmouth, looking at Coningsby with a glance
        such as he had never before encountered, "who is not prepared to sacrifice all
       the objects of life, for the pursuit of some fantastical puerilities."
His Lordship rang a bell on his table for Villebecque, and to prevent any further
       conversation, resumed his papers.

