
CHAPTER IV.
Alone in his chambers, no longer under the sustaining influence of Sidonia's
       converse and counsel, the shades of night descending and bearing gloom to the gloomy, all the
       excitement of his spirit evaporated, the heart of Coningsby sank. All now depended on
       himself, and in that self he had no trust. Why should he succeed? Success was the most rare
       of results. Thousands fail; units triumph. And even success could only be conducted to him by
       the course of many years. His career, even if prosperous, was now to commence by the greatest
       sacrifice which the heart of man could be called upon to sustain. Upon the stern altar of his
        fortunes, he must immolate his first and enduring love. Before, he had a
       perilous position to offer Edith; now he had none. The future might then have aided them;
       there was no combination which could improve his present. Under any circumstances, he must
       after all his thought and studies, commence a new novitiate, and before he could enter the
       arena, must pass years of silent and obscure preparation. 'Twas very bitter. He looked up,
       his eye caught that drawing of the towers of Hellingsley which she had given him in the days
       of their happy hearts. That was all that was to remain of their loves. He was to bear it to
       the future scene of his labours, to remind him through revolving years of toil and routine,
       that he too had had his romance, had roamed in fair gardens, and whispered in willing ears
       the secrets of his passion. That drawing was to become the altar piece of his life.
Coningsby passed an agitated night of broken sleep, waking often with a consciousness of
       having experienced some great misfortune, yet with a very indefinite conception of its
       nature. He woke exhausted and dispirited. It was a
        gloomy day, a raw north-easter blowing up the cloisters of the Albany, in which
       the fog was lingering, the newspaper on his breakfast table full of rumoured particulars of
       his grandfather's will, which had of course been duly digested by all who knew him: What a
       contrast to St. Geneviève! To the bright bracing morn of that merry Christmas! That radiant
       and cheerful scene, and those gracious and beaming personages, seemed another world and order
       of beings to the one he now habited and the people with whom he must now commune. The Great
       Seal indeed! It was the wild excitement of despair, the frenzied hope that blends inevitably
       with absolute ruin, that could alone have inspired such a hallucination! His unstrung heart
       deserted him. His energies could rally no more. He gave orders that he was at home to no one;
       and in his dressing gown and slippers, with his feet resting on the fire-place, the once
       high-souled and noble-hearted Coningsby delivered himself up to despair.
The day passed in a dark trance rather than a reverie. Nothing rose to his consciousness.
       He was like a particle of Chaos; at the best, a
        glimmering entity of some shadowy Hades. Towards evening the wind changed, the
       fog dispersed, there came a clear starry night, brisk and bright. Coningsby roused himself,
       dressed, and wrapping his cloak around him sallied forth. Once more in the mighty streets,
       surrounded by millions, his petty griefs and personal fortunes assumed their proper position.
       Well had Sidonia taught him, view everything in its relation to the rest. 'Tis the secret of
       all wisdom. Here was the mightiest of modern cities; the rival even of the most celebrated of
       the ancient. Whether he inherited or forfeited fortunes, what was it to the passing throng?
       They would not share his splendour, or his luxury, or his comfort. But a word from his lip, a
       thought from his brain expressed at the right time, at the right place, might turn their
       hearts, might influence their passions, might change their opinions, might affect their
       destiny. Nothing is great but the personal. As civilisation advances, the accidents of life
       become each day less important. The power of man, his greatness and his glory, depend on
       essential qualities. Brains every day become more
        precious than blood. You must give men new ideas, you must teach them new
       words, you must modify their manners, you must change their laws, you must root out
       prejudices, subvert convictions, if you wish to be great. Greatness no longer depends on
       rentals; the world is too rich; nor on pedigrees; the world is too knowing.
"The greatness of this city destroys my misery," said Coningsby, "and my genius shall
       conquer its greatness!"
This conviction of power in the midst of despair was a revelation of intrinsic strength. It
       is indeed the test of a creative spirit. From that moment all petty fears for an ordinary
       future quitted him. He felt that he must be prepared for great sacrifices, for infinite
       suffering; that there must devolve on him a bitter inheritance of obscurity, struggle, envy
       and hatred, vulgar prejudice, base criticism, petty hostilities, but the dawn would break,
       and the hour arrive, when the welcome morning hymn of his success and his fame would sound
       and be re-echoed.
He returned to his rooms; calm, resolute.
        He slept the deep sleep of a man void of anxiety; that has neither hope nor
       fear to haunt his visions, but is prepared to rise on the morrow collected for the great
       human struggle.
And the morrow came. Fresh, vigorous, not rash or precipitate, yet determined to lose no
       time in idle meditation, Coningsby already resolved at once to quit his present residence was
       projecting a visit to some legal quarter, where he intended in future to reside, when his
       servant brought him a note. The handwriting was feminine. The note was from Flora. The
       contents were brief. She begged Mr. Coningsby with great earnestness to do her the honour and
       the kindness of calling on her at his earliest convenience, at the hotel in Brook Street
       where she now resided.
It was an interview which Coningsby would rather have avoided; yet it seemed to him, after
       a moment's reflection, neither just nor kind, nor manly to refuse her request. Flora had not
       injured him. She was after all his kin. Was it for a moment to be supposed that he was
       envious of her lot? He replied, therefore, that in an hour he would wait upon her.

In an hour then two individuals are to be brought together, whose first meeting was held
       under circumstances most strangely different. Then Coningsby was the patron, a generous and
       spontaneous one, of a being obscure, almost friendless, and sinking under bitter
       mortification. His favour could not be the less appreciated because he was the chosen
       relative of a powerful noble. That noble was no more; his vast inheritance had devolved on
       the disregarded, even despised actress, whose suffering emotions Coningsby had then soothed,
       and whose fortune had risen on the destruction of all his prospects, and the baulk of all his
       aspirations.
Flora was alone when Coningsby was ushered into the room. The extreme delicacy of her
       appearance was increased by her deep mourning, and seated in a cushioned chair, from which
       she seemed to rise with an effort, she certainly presented little of the character of a
       fortunate and prosperous heiress.
"You are very good to come to me," she said, faintly smiling.
Coningsby extended his hand to her affectionately
        in which she placed her own, looking down much embarrassed.
"You have an agreeable situation here," said Coningsby, trying to break the first
       awkwardness of their meeting.
"Yes; but I hope not to stay here long."
"You are going abroad?"
"No; I hope never to leave England!"
There was a slight pause; and then Flora sighed and said:
"I wish to speak to you on a subject that gives me pain; yet of which I must speak. You
       think I have injured you?"
"I am sure," said Coningsby in a tone of great kindness, "that you could injure no
       one."
"I have robbed you of your inheritance."
"It was not mine by any right legal or moral. There were others who might have urged an
       equal claim to it; and there are many who will now think that you might have preferred a
       superior one."
"You had enemies; I was not one. They sought to benefit themselves by injuring you. They
       have not benefited themselves; let them
        not say, that they have at least injured you."
"We will care not what they say," said Coningsby, "I can sustain my lot."
"Would that I could mine!" said Flora. She sighed again with a downcast glance. Then
       looking up embarrassed and blushing deeply, she added: "I wish to restore to you that fortune
       of which I have unconsciously and unwillingly deprived you."
"The fortune is yours, dear Flora, by every right;" said Coningsby much moved; "and there
       is no one who wishes more fervently, that it may contribute to your happiness than I do."
"It is killing me," said Flora, mournfully; then speaking with unusual animation, with a
       degree of excitement, she continued: "I must tell what I feel. This fortune is yours. I am
       happy in the inheritance, if you generously receive it from me, because Providence has made
       me the means of baffling your enemies. I never thought to be so happy as I shall be if you
       will generously accept this fortune, always intended for you. I have lived then for a
        purpose; I have not lived in vain; I have returned to you some service, however
       humble, for all your—goodness to me in my unhappiness."
"You are, as I have ever thought you, the kindest and most tender-hearted of beings. But
       you misconceive our mutual positions, my gentle Flora. The custom of the world does not
       permit such acts to either of us as you contemplate. The fortune is yours. It is left you by
       one on whose affections you had the highest claim. I will not say that so large an
       inheritance does not bring with it an alarming responsibility; but you are not unequal to it.
       Have confidence in yourself. You have a good heart; you have good sense; you have a
       well-principled being. Your spirit will mount with your fortunes, and blend with them. You
       will be happy."
"And you?"
"I shall soon learn to find content, if not happiness, from other sources," said Coningsby;
       "and mere riches, however vast, could at no time have secured my felicity."
"But they may secure that which brings felicity," said Flora, speaking in a choaking voice,
       and not meeting the glance of Coningsby.
        "You had some views in life which displeased him who has done all this; they
       may be, they must be, affected by this fatal caprice. Speak to me, for I cannot speak, dear
       Mr. Coningsby; do not let me believe that I, who would sacrifice my life for your happiness,
       am the cause of such calamities!"
"Whatever be my lot, I repeat I can sustain it," said Coningsby with a cheek of
       scarlet.
"Ah! he is angry with me," exclaimed Flora, "he is angry with me," and the tears stole down
       her pale cheek.
"No, no, no, dear Flora; I have no other feelings to you but those of affection and
       respect," and Coningsby much agitated drew his chair nearer to her and took her hand. "I am
       gratified by these kind wishes, though they are utterly impracticable; but they are the
       witnesses of your sweet disposition and your noble spirit. There never shall exist between
       us, under any circumstances, other feelings but those of kin and kindness."
He rose as if to depart. When she saw that, she started, and seemed to summon all her
       energies.

"You are going," she exclaimed, "and I have said nothing, I have said nothing. And I shall
       never see you again. Let me tell you what I mean. This fortune is yours; it must be yours. It
       is an arrow in my heart. Do not think I am speaking from a momentary impulse. I know myself.
       I have lived so much alone; I have had so little to deceive or to delude me; that I know
       myself, If you will not let me do justice, you declare my doom. I cannot live if my existence
       is the cause of all your prospects being blasted, and the sweetest dreams of your life being
       defeated. When I die, these riches will be yours; that you cannot prevent. Refuse my present
       offer, and you seal the fate of that unhappy Flora, whose fragile life has hung for years on
       the memory of your kindness."
"You must not say these words, dear Flora, you must not indulge in these gloomy feelings.
       You must live, and you must live happily. You have every charm and virtue which should secure
       happiness. The duties and the affections of existence will fall to your lot. It is one
        that will always interest me, for I shall ever be your friend. You have
       conferred on me one of the most delightful of feelings—gratitude, and for that I bless you. I
       will soon see you again." Mournfully he bade her farewell.

