
CHAPTER VIII.
After eight o'clock school, the day following the return of Coningsby, according
       to custom, he repaired to Buckhurst's room, where Henry Sydney, Lord Vere, and our hero held
       with him their breakfast mess. They were all in the fifth form, and habitual companions, on
       the river or on the Fives' Wall, at cricket or at football. The return of Coningsby, their
       leader alike in sport and study, inspired them today with unusual spirits, which, to say the
       truth were never particularly depressed. Where he had been, what had he seen, what he had
       done, what sort of fellow his grandfather was,
        whether the visit had been a success—here were materials for almost endless
       inquiry. And, indeed, to do them justice, the last question was not the least exciting to
       them; for the deep and cordial interest which all felt in Coningsby's welfare far outweighed
       the curiosity which, under ordinary circumstances, they would have experienced on the return
       of one of their companions from an unusual visit to London. The report of their friend
       imparted to them unbounded satisfaction; when they learned that his relative was a splendid
       fellow; that he had been loaded with kindness and favours; that Monmouth House, the wonders
       of which he rapidly sketched, was hereafter to be his home; that Lord Monmouth was coming
       down to Montem; that Coningsby was to order any dress he liked, build a new boat if he chose,
       and, finally, had been tipped in a manner worthy of a Marquess and a grandfather.
"By the bye," said Buckhurst when the hubbub had a little subsided, "I am afraid you
        will not half like it, Coningsby: but, old fellow, I had no idea you would be
       back this morning, I have asked Millbank, to breakfast here."
A cloud stole over the clear brow of Coningsby.
"It was my fault," said the amiable Henry Sydney; "but I really wanted to be civil to
       Millbank and as you were not here, I put Buckhurst up to ask him."
"Well," said Coningsby, as if sullenly resigned, "never mind; but why you should ask an
       infernal manufacturer!"
"Why the Duke always wished me to pay him some attention," said Lord Henry, mildly. "His
       family were so civil to us when we were at Manchester."
"Manchester, indeed!" said Coningsby; "if you knew what I did about Manchester! A pretty
       state we have been in London this week past with your Manchesters and Birminghams!"
"Come—come, Coningsby," said Lord Vere, the son of a Whig minister; "I am all for
       Manchester and Birmingham."

"It is all up with the country I can tell you," said Coningsby, with the air of one who was
       in the secret.
"My father says it will all go right now," rejoined Lord Vere. "I had a letter from my
       sister yesterday."
"They say we shall all lose our estates though," said Buckhurst; "I know I shall not give
       up mine without a fight. Shirley was besieged, you know, in the civil wars; and the rebels
       got infernally licked."
"I think that all the people about Beaumanoir would stand by the Duke," said Lord Henry,
       pensively.
"Well—you may depend upon it you will have it very soon," said Coningsby. "I know it from
       the best authority."
"It depends whether my father remains in," said Lord Vere. "He is the only man who can
       govern the country now. All say that."
At this moment Millbank came in. He was a good-looking boy, somewhat shy, and yet with
        a sincere expression in his countenance. He was, evidently, not extremely
       intimate with those who were now his companions. Buckhurst, and Henry Sydney, and Vere
       welcomed him cordially. He looked at Coningsby with some constraint, and then said:
"You have been in London, Coningsby?"
"Yes, I have been there during all the row."
"You must have had a rare lark."
"Yes, if having your windows broken by a mob be a rare lark. They could not break my
       grandfather's though. Monmouth House is in a court yard. All noblemen's houses should be in
       court yards."
"I was glad to see it all ended very well," said Millbank.
"It has not begun yet," said Coningsby.
"What?" said Millbank.
"Why—the revolution."
"The Reform Bill will prevent a revolution, my father says," said Millbank.
"By Jove! here's the goose," said Buckhurst.

At this moment there entered the room a little boy, the scion of a noble house, bearing a
       roasted goose which he had carried from the kitchen of the opposite inn, the Christopher. The
       lower boy or fag, depositing his burthen, asked his master whether he had further need of
       him, and Buckhurst after looking round the table and ascertaining that he had not, gave him
       permission to retire; but he had scarcely disappeared when his master singing out "Lower boy,
       St. John," he immediately re-entered and demanded his master's pleasure, which was, that he
       should pour some water in the tea-pot. This being accomplished, St. John really made his
       escape and retired to a pupil room, where the bullying of a tutor, because he had no
       derivations, exceeded, in all probability, the bullying of his master, had he contrived in
       his passage from the Christopher to have upset the goose or dropped the sausages.
In their merry meal, the Reform Bill was forgotten. Their thoughts were soon concentred
        in their little world, thought it must be owned that visions of palaces and
       beautiful ladies did occasionally flit over the brain of one of the company. But for him
       especially there was much of interest and novelty. So much had happened in his absence! There
       was a week's arrears for him of Eton annals. They were recounted in so fresh a spirit and in
       such vivid colours, that Coningsby lost nothing by his London visit. All the bold feats that
       had been done, and all the bright things that had been said; all the triumphs, and all the
       failures, and all the scrapes; how popular one master had made himself, and how ridiculous
       another; all was detailed with a liveliness, a candour, and a picturesque ingenuousness,
       which would have made the fortune of a Herodotus or a Froissart.
"I'll tell you what," said Buckhurst, "I move that after twelve is called, we five go up to
       Maidenhead."
"Agreed—agreed!"

