
CHAPTER XIV.
About this time a steeple-chase in the West of England had attracted considerable
       attention. This sport was then of recent introduction in England, and is in fact an
       importation of Irish growth, although it has flourished in our soil. A young guardsman who
       was then a guest at the Castle, and who had been in garrison in Ireland, had some experience
       of this pastime in the Kildare country, and he proposed that they should have a steeple chase
       at Coningsby. This was a suggestion very agreeable to the Marquess of Beaumanoir celebrated
       for his feats of horsemanship, and indeed to most
        of the guests. It was agreed that the race should come off at once, before any
       of the present company, many of whom gave symptoms of being on the wing, had quitted the
       Castle. The young guardsman and Mr. Guy Flouncey had surveyed the country, and had selected a
       tract which they esteemed very appropriate for the scene of action. From a hill of common
       land you looked down upon the valley of Coningsby richly cultivated; deeply ditched and
       stiffly fenced; the valley was bounded by another rising ground, and the scene was admirably
       calculated to give an extensive view to a multitude.
The distance along the valley was to be two miles out, and home again; the starting post
       being also the winning post, and the flags which were placed on every fence that the horses
       were to pass, were to be passed on the left hand of the rider both going and coming; so that
       although the horses had to leap the same fences forward and backward, they could not come
       over the same place twice. In the last field before they turned, was a brook seventeen feet
       clear from side
        to side, with good taking off on both banks. This was the critical venture.
Lord Monmouth highly approved the scheme, but mentioned that the sweepstakes must be
       moderate and open to the whole county. The neighbourhood had a week of preparation, and the
       entries for the Coningsby steeple-chase were numerous. Lord Monmouth after a reserve for his
       own account placed his stable at the service of his guests. For himself he offered to back
       his horse, Sir Robert, which was to be ridden by his grandson.
Now nothing was spoken or thought of at Coningsby Castle except the coming sport. The
       ladies shared the general excitement. They embroidered handkerchiefs, and scarfs, and gloves,
       with the respective colours of the rivals, and tried to make jockey-caps. Lady St. Julians
       postponed her intended departure in consequence. Madame Colonna wished that some means could
       be contrived by which they might all win.
Sidonia with the other competitors had ridden over the country, and marked well the points;
        he glanced rather sharply at the brook, and on his return to the Castle he sent
       a despatch for some of his stud.
Coningsby was all anxiety to win. He was proud of the confidence of his grandfather in
       backing him. He had a powerful horse and a first-rate fencer, and he was resolved himself not
       to flinch. On the night before the race retiring somewhat earlier than usual to his chamber,
       he observed on his dressing-table a small packet addressed to his name, and in an unknown
       hand-writing. Opening it he found a very pretty jockey whip embroidered with his colours of
       pink and white. This was a perplexing circumstance, but he fancied it on the whole a happy
       omen. And who was the donor? Certainly not the Princess Lucretia, for he had observed her
       fashioning some maroon ribands which were the colours of Sidonia. It could scarcely be from
       Mrs. Guy Flouncey. Perhaps Madame Colonna to please—the Marquess? Thinking over this incident
       he fell asleep.
The morning before the race Sidonia's horses arrived. All went to examine them at the
       stables.
        Among them was an Arab mare. Coningsby recognised the Daughter of the Star. She
       was greatly admired for her points; but Guy Flouncey whispered to Mr. Melton that she never
       could do the work.
"But Lord Beaumanoir says he is all for speed against strength in these affairs," said Mr.
       Melton.
Guy Flouncey smiled incredulously.
The night before the race it rained heavily.
"I take it the country will not be very like the desarts of Arabia," said Mr. Guy Flouncey
       with a knowing look to Mr. Melton, who was noting a bet in his memorandum book.
The morning was very fine, clear and sunny, with a soft western breeze. The starting post
       was about three miles from the Castle; but long before the hour, the surrounding hills were
       covered with people; squire and farmer; with no lack of their wives and daughters; many a
       hind in his smock-frock, and many an "operative" from the neighbouring factories. The
       "gentlemen riders" gradually arrived. The
        entries were very numerous, though it was understood that not more than a dozen
       would start, and half of these were the guests of Lord Monmouth. At half-past one the cortège
       from the Castle arrived, and took up the post which had been prepared for them on the summit
       of the hill. Lord Monmouth was very much cheered on his arrival. In the carriage with him
       were Madame Colonna and Lady St. Julians. The Princess Lucretia, Lady Gaythorpe, Mrs. Guy
       Flouncey, accompanied by Lord Eskdale and other cavaliers, formed a brilliant company. There
       was scarcely a domestic in the Castle who was not there. The comedians indeed did not care to
       come, but Villebecque prevailed upon Flora to drive with him to the race in a buggy he
       borrowed of the steward.
The start was to be at two o'clock. The "gentlemen jockeys" are mustered. Never were riders
       mounted and appointed in better style. The stewards and the clerk of the course attend them
       to the starting-post. There they are now assembled. Guy Flouncey adjusts his
       stirrup-leathers; Mr. Melton ties a knot in
        his bridle. In a few moments, the irrevocable monosyllable will be uttered.
The bugle sounds for them to face about: the Clerk of the Course sings out: "Gentlemen, are
       you all ready?" No objection made, the word given to go, and fifteen riders start in
       excellent style.
Prince Colonna, who rode like Prince Rupert, took the lead, followed close by a stout
       yeoman on an old white horse of great provincial celebrity, who made steady running, and from
       his appearance and action, a dangerous customer. The rest, with two exceptions, followed in a
       cluster at no great distance, and in this order they continued with very slight variation for
       the two first miles, though the fences were frequent and one or two of them awkward. Indeed
       they appeared more like horses running over a course than over a country. The two exceptions
       were Lord Beaumanoir on his horse Sunbeam and Sidonia on the Arab. These kept somewhat
       slightly in the rear.
Almost in this wise they approached the dreaded brook. Indeed with the exception of
        the last two riders who were about thirty yards behind, it seemed that you
       might have covered the rest of the field with a cloak. They arrived at the brook at the same
       moment: seventeen feet of water between strong sound banks is no holiday work; but they
       charged with unfaltering intrepidity. But what a revolution in their spirited order did that
       instant produce! A masked battery of cannister and grape could not have achieved more
       terrible execution. Coningsby alone clearly lighted on the opposing bank; but for the rest of
       them, it seemed for a moment, that they were all in the middle of the brook, one over
       another, splashing, kicking, swearing; every one trying to get out and keep others in. Mr.
       Melton and the stout yeoman regained their saddles and were soon again in chace. The Prince
       lost his horse, and was not alone in his misfortune. Mr. Guy Flouncey lay on his back with a
       horse across his diaphragm; only his head above the water, and his mouth full of chick-weed
       and dock leaves. And if help had not been at hand, he and several others might have remained
       struggling in their watery
        bed for a considerable period. In the midst of this turmoil, the Marquess and
       Sidonia at the same moment cleared the brook.
Affairs now became very interesting. All heads were now turned to the winning post.
       Coningsby was in front; Sidonia and the Marquess following; Mr. Melton had gone the wrong
       side of a flag, and the stout yeoman, though close at hand, was already trusting much to his
       spurs. In the extreme distance might be detected three or four stragglers. Thus they
       continued until within three fields of the winning post. A ploughed field finished the old
       white horse; the yeoman stuck his spurs to the rowels, but the only effect of the experiment
       was, that the horse stood stock still. Coningsby, Sidonia, and the Marquess were now
       altogether. The winning post is in sight, and a high and strong gate leads to the last field.
       Coningsby gallantly dashed forward and sent Sir Robert at the gate, but he had over-estimated
       his horse's powers at this point of the game, and a rattling fall was the consequence:
       however, horse and rider were both on the right side, and Coningsby
        was in his saddle again, and near at hand. It seemed that the Marquess was
       winning. There was only one more fence; and that the foot people had made a breach in by the
       side of a gate post and wide enough, as was said, for a broad wheel waggon to travel by.
       Instead of passing straight over this gap, Sunbeam swerved against the gate and threw his
       rider. This was decisive. The Daughter of the Star, who was still going beautifully, pulling
       freely, and her jockey sitting still, sprang over the gap and went in first, Coningsby on Sir
       Robert being placed second. The distance measured was about four miles; there were
       thirty-nine leaps and it was done under fifteen minutes.
Lord Monmouth was well content with the prowess of his grandson, and his extreme cordiality
       consoled Coningsby under a defeat, which was very vexatious. It was some alleviation that he
       was beaten by Sidonia. Madame Colonna even shed tears at her young friend's disappointment,
       and mourned it especially for Lucretia, who had said nothing, though a flush
        might be observed on her usually pale countenance. Villebecque who had betted
       was so extremely excited by the whole affair, especially during the last three minutes, that
       he quite forgot his quiet companion, and when he looked round he found Flora fainting.
"You rode well," said Sidonia to Coningsby; "but your horse was more strong than swift.
       After all this thing is a race; and notwithstanding Solomon, in a race speed must win."

