
CHAPTER IX.
Millbank was the son of one of the wealthiest manufacturers of Lancashire. His
       father, whose opinions were of a very democratic bent, sent his son to Eton, though he
       disapproved of the system of education pursued there, to show that he had as much right to do
       so as any Duke in the land. He had, however, brought up his only boy with a due prejudice
       against every sentiment or institution of an aristocratic character, and had especially
       impressed upon him in his school career to avoid the slightest semblance of courting the
        affections or society of any member of the falsely held superior class.
The character of the son, as much as the influence of the father, tended to the fulfilment
       of these injunctions. Oswald Millbank was of a proud and independent nature; reserved, a
       little stern. The early and constantly reiterated dogma of his father, that he belonged to a
       class debarred from its just position in the social system, had aggravated the grave and
       somewhat discontented humour of his blood. His talents were considerable, though invested
       with no dazzling quality. He had not that quick and brilliant apprehension, which, combined
       with a memory of rare retentiveness, had already advanced Coningsby far beyond his age, and
       made him already looked to as the future hero of the school. But Millbank possessed one of
       those strong industrious volitions whose perseverance amounts almost to genius, and nearly
       attains its results. Though Coningsby was by a year his junior, they were rivals. This
       circumstance
        had no tendency to remove the prejudice which Coningsby entertained against him,
       but its bias on the part of Millbank had a very contrary effect.
The influence of the individual is nowhere so sensible as at school. There the personal
       qualities strike without any intervening and counteracting causes. A gracious presence, noble
       sentiments, or a happy talent, make their way there at once, without preliminary inquiries as
       to what set they are in, or what family they are of, how much they have a year, or where they
       live. Now on no spirit had the influence of Coningsby, already the favourite, and soon
       probably to become the idol, of the school, fallen more effectually than on that of Millbank,
       though it was an influence that no one could suspect except its votary, or its victim.
At school, friendship is a passion. It entrances the being; it tears the soul. All loves of
       after life can never bring its rapture, or its wretchedness; no bliss so absorbing, no pangs
        of jealousy or despair so crushing and so keen! What tenderness and what
       devotion; what illimitable confidence; infinite revelations of inmost thoughts; what ecstatic
       present and romantic future; what bitter estrangements and what melting reconciliations; what
       scenes of wild recrimination, agitating explanations, passionate correspondence; what insane
       sensitiveness, and what frantic sensibility; what earthquakes of the heart, and whirlwinds of
       the soul, are confined in that simple phrase—a schoolboy's friendship! 'Tis some indefinite
       recollection of these mystic passages of their young emotion, that makes grey-haired men
       mourn over the memory of their schoolboy days. It is a spell that can soften the acerbity of
       political warfare, and with its witchery can call forth a sigh even amid the callous bustle
       of fashionable saloons.
The secret of Millbank's life was a passionate admiration and affection for Coningsby.
       Pride, his natural reserve and his father's injunctions,
        had however hitherto successfully combined to restrain the slightest
       demonstration of these sentiments. Indeed Coningsby and himself were never companions, except
       in school, or in some public game. The demeanour of Coningsby gave no encouragement to
       intimacy to one, who, under any circumstances, would have required considerable invitation to
       open himself. So Millbank fed in silence on a cherished idea. It was his happiness to be in
       the same form, to join in the same sport with Coningsby; occasionally to be thrown in unusual
       contact with him, to exchange slight and not unkind words. In their division they were
       rivals; Millbank sometimes triumphed, but to be vanquished by Coningsby was for him not
       without a degree of wild satisfaction. Not a gesture, not a phrase from Coningsby, that he
       did not watch and ponder over and treasure up. Coningsby was his model, alike in studies, in
       manners, or in pastimes; the aptest scholar, the gayest wit, the most graceful associate, the
       most accomplished
        playmate: his standard of the excellent. Yet Millbank was the very last boy in
       the school who would have had credit given him by his companions for profound and ardent
       feeling. He was not, indeed, unpopular. The favourite of the school like Coningsby, he could
       under no circumstances, ever have become; nor was he qualified to obtain that general
       graciousness among the multitude, which the sweet disposition of Henry Sydney or the gay
       profusion of Buckhurst, acquired without an effort. Millbank was not blessed with the charm
       of manner. He seemed close and cold; but he was courageous, just and inflexible; never
       bullied, and to his utmost would prevent tyranny. The little boys looked up to him as to a
       stern protector. His word throughout the school too was a proverb: and truth ranks a great
       quality among boys. In a word, Millbank was respected by those among whom he lived, and
       schoolboys scan character more nicely than men suppose.

A brother of Henry Sydney, quartered in Lancashire had been wounded recently in a riot, and
       had received great kindness from the Millbank family, in whose immediate neighbourhood the
       disturbance had occurred. The kind Duke had impressed on Henry Sydney to acknowledge with
       cordiality to the younger Millbank at Eton, the sense which his family entertained of these
       benefits; but though Henry lost neither time nor opportunity in obeying an injunction, which
       was grateful to his own heart, he failed in cherishing, or indeed creating any intimacy with
       the object of his solicitude. A companionship with one who was Coningsby's relative and most
       familiar friend, would at the first glance have appeared, independent of all other
       considerations, a most desirable result for Millbank to accomplish. But perhaps this very
       circumstance afforded additional reasons for the absence of all encouragement with which he
       received the overtures of Lord Henry. Millbank suspected that Coningsby was not affected in
       his favour, and
        his pride recoiled from gaining by any indirect means, an intimacy which to
       have obtained in a plain and express manner, would have deeply gratified him. However the
       urgent invitation of Buckhurst and Henry Sydney, and the fear that a persistance in refusal
       might be misinterpreted into churlishness, had at length brought Millbank to their
       breakfast-mess, though when he accepted their invitation, he did not apprehend that Coningsby
       would have been present.
It was about an hour before sunset, the day of this very breakfast, and a good number of
       boys in lounging groups, were collected in the Long Walk. The sports and matches of the day
       were over. Criticism had succeeded to action in sculling and in cricket. They talked over the
       exploits of the morning; canvassed the merits of the competitors, marked the fellow whose
       play or whose stroke was improving, glanced at another, whose promise had not been fulfilled;
       discussed the pretensions, and
        adjudged the palm. Thus public opinion is formed. Some too might be seen with
       their books and exercises, intent on the inevitable and impending task. Among these, some
       unhappy wight in the remove wandering about with his hat after parochial fashion, seeking
       relief in the shape of a verse. A hard lot this, to know that you must be delivered of
       fourteen verses at least in the twenty-four hours, and to be conscious that you are pregnant
       of none. The lesser boys, urchins of tender years, clustered like flies round the baskets of
       certain vendors of sugary delicacies that rested on the Long Walk wall. The pallid
       countenance, the lack-lustre eye, the hoarse voice clogged with accumulated phlegm, indicated
       too surely the irreclaimable and hopeless votary of lollypop—the opium eater of
       schoolboys.
"It is settled, the match to-morrow shall be between Aquatics and Drybobs," said a senior
       boy; who was arranging a future match at cricket.

"But what's to be done about Fielding Major?" inquired another. "He has not paid his
       boating money, and I say he has no right to play among the Aquatics before he has paid his
       money."
"Oh! but we must have Fielding Major, he's such a devil of a swipe."
"I declare he shall not play among the Aquatics if he does not pay his boating money. It is
       an infernal shame."
"Let us ask Buckhurst. Where is Buckhurst?"
"Have you got any toffy?" inquired a dull looking little boy in a hoarse voice of one of
       the vendors of scholastic confectionary."
"Tom Trot, Sir."
"No; I want toffy."
"Very nice Tom Trot, Sir."
"No, I want toffy; I have been eating Tom Trot all day."
"Where is Buckhurst? We must settle about the Aquatics."

"Well, I for one will not play if Fielding Major plays amongst the Aquatics. That's
       settled."
"Oh! nonsense; he will pay his money if you ask him."
"I shall not ask him again. The captain duns us every day. It's an infernal shame."
"I say Burnham, where can one get some toffy? This fellow never has any."
"I'll tell you; at Barnes' on the bridge. The best toffy in the world."
"I'll go at once. I must have some toffy."
"Just help me with this verse, Collins," said one boy to another in an imploring tone,
       "that's a good fellow."
"Well, give it us: first syllable in fabri is short; three false quantities in the
       two first lines! You're a pretty one. There, I have done it for you."
"That's a good fellow."
"Any fellow seen Buckhurst?"
"Gone up the river with Coningsby and Henry Sydney."

"But he must be back by this time. I want him to make the list for the match to-morrow.
       Where the deuce can Buckhurst be?"
And now as rumours rise in society we know not how, so there was suddenly a flying report
       in this multitude, the origin of which no one in their alarm stopped to ascertain, that a boy
       was drowned.
Every heart was agitated.
What boy? When—where—how? Who was absent? Who had been on the river today? Buckhurst. The
       report ran that Buckhurst was drowned. Great were the trouble and consternation. Buckhurst
       was ever much liked; and now no one remembered anything but his good qualities.
"Who heard it was Buckhurst?" said Sedgwick, captain of the school, coming forward.
"I heard Bradford tell Palmer it was Buckhurst," said a little boy.
"Where is Bradford?"
"Here."

"What do you know about Buckhurst?"
"Wentworth told me that he was afraid Buckhurst was drowned. He heard it at Brocas; a
       bargeman told him about a quarter of an hour ago."
"Here's Wentworth—here's Wentworth!" a hundred voices exclaimed, and they formed a circle
       round him.
"Well, what did you hear Wentworth?" asked Sedgwick.
"I was at Brocas, and a bargeman told me that an Eton boy had been drowned up stream, and
       the only Eton boat up stream to-day, as I can learn is Buckhurst's. That is all."
There was a murmur of hope.
"Oh! come, come," said Sedgwick, "there is some chance. Who is with Buckhurst; who
       knows?"
"I saw him walk down to Brocas with Vere," said a boy.
"I hope it is not Vere," said a little boy
        with a tearful eye, "he never lets any fellow bully me."
"Here's Maltravers," halloed out a boy, "he knows something."
"Well, what do you know Maltravers?"
"I heard Boots at the Christopher say that an Eton boy was drowned, and that he had seen a
       person who was there."
"Bring Boots here," said Sedgwick.
Instantly a band of boys rushed over the way, and in a moment the witness was produced.
"What have you heard, Sam, about this accident?" said Sedgwick.
"Well, Sir, I heerd a young gentleman was drowned above Monkey Island," said Boots.
"And no name mentioned?"
"Well, Sir, I believe it was Mr. Coningsby."
A general groan of horror.
"Coningsby—Coningsby! By Heavens, I hope not," said Sedgwick.
"I very much fear so," said Boots; "as how
        the bargeman who told me, saw Mr. Coningsby in the lock-house laid out in
       flannels."
"I had sooner any fellow had been drowned than Coningsby," whispered one boy to
       another.
"I liked him, the best fellow at Eton," responded his companion, in a smothered tone.
"What a clever fellow he was!"
"And so deuced generous!"
"He would have got the medal if he had lived."
"And how came he to be drowned, for he was such a fine swimmer!"
"I heerd Mr. Coningsby was a saving another's life," continued Boots in his evidence,
       "which makes it in a manner more sorrowful."
"Poor Coningsby!" exclaimed a boy, bursting into tears, "I move the whole school goes into
       mourning."
"I wish we could get hold of this bargeman," said Sedgwick. "Now stop, stop, don't all run
       away in that mad manner; you frighten the people. Charles Herbert and Palmer, you two go down
       to Brocas and inquire."

But just at this moment, an increased stir and excitement were evident in the long walk;
       the circle round Sedgwick opened, and there appeared Henry Sydney and Buckhurst.
There was a dead silence. It was impossible that suspense could be strained to a higher
       pitch. The air and countenance of Sydney and Buckhurst were rather excited than mournful or
       alarmed. They needed no inquiries, for before they had penetrated the circle they had become
       aware of its cause.
Buckhurst, the most energetic of beings, was of course the first to speak. Henry Sydney,
       indeed, looked pale and nervous; but his companion, flushed and resolute, knew exactly how to
       hit a popular assembly and at once came to the point.
"It is all a false report; an infernal lie; Coningsby is quite safe, and nobody is
       drowned."
There was a cheer that might have been heard at Windsor Castle. Then, turning to Sedgwick,
       in an under tone Buckhurst added:

"It is all right, but by Jove we have had a shaver! I will tell you all in a
       moment, but we want to keep the thing quiet, and so let the fellows disperse and we will talk
       afterwards."
In a few moments, the Long Walk had reassumed its usual character; but Sedgwick, Herbert,
       and one or two others turned into the Playing fields where, undisturbed and unnoticed by the
       multitude, they listened to the promised communication of Buckhurst and Henry Sydney.
"You know we went up the river together," said Buckhurst. "Myself, Henry Sydney, Coningsby,
       Vere, and Millbank. We had breakfasted together, and after twelve agreed to row up. Well we
       went up much higher than we had intended. About a quarter of a mile before we had got to
       Maidenhead Lock we pulled up; Coningsby was then steering. Well, we fastened the boat to, and
       were all of us stretched out in the meadow, when Millbank and Vere said they should go and
       bathe in the Lock Pool. The rest of us were opposed; but after Millbank
        and Vere had gone about ten minutes, Coningsby, who was very fresh, said he had
       changed his mind and should go and bathe, too. So he left us. He had scarcely got to the pool
       when he heard a cry. There was a fellow drowning. He threw off his clothes and was in in a
       moment. The fact is this, Millbank had plunged in the pool and found himself in some eddies,
       caused by the meeting of two currents. He called out to Vere not to come and tried to swim
       off. But he was beat, and seeing he was in danger, Vere jumped in. But the stream was so
       strong from the great fall of water from the lasher above, that Vere was exhausted before he
       could reach Millbank and nearly sank himself. Well, he just saved himself; but Millbank sank
       as Coningsby jumped in. What do you think of that?"
"By Jove!" exclaimed Sedgwick, Herbert and all. The favourite oath of schoolboys
       perpetuates the divinity of Olympus.
"And now comes the worst. Coningsby
        caught Millbank when he rose; but he found himself in the midst of the same
       strong current that had before nearly swamped Vere. What a lucky thing that he had taken it
       into his head not to pull to-day! Fresher than Vere, he just managed to land Millbank and
       himself. The shouts of Vere called us, and we arrived to find the bodies of Millbank and
       Coningsby apparently lifeless, for Millbank was quite gone, and Coningsby had swooned on
       landing."
"If Coningsby had been lost," said Henry Sydney, "I never would have shown my face at Eton
       again."
"Can you conceive a position more terrible?" said Buckhurst. "I declare I shall never
       forget it as long as I live. However there was the Lock House at hand; and we got blankets
       and brandy. Coningsby was soon all right; but Millbank, I can tell you, gave us some trouble.
       I thought it was all up. Didn't you, Henry Sydney?"
"The most fishy thing I ever saw," said Henry Sydney.

"Well, we were fairly frightened here," said Sedgwick. "The first report was, that you had
       gone; but that seemed without foundation. But Coningsby was quite given up. Where are they
       now?"
"They are both at their tutors. I thought they had better keep quiet. Vere is with
       Millbank, and we are going back to Coningsby directly; but we thought it best to show,
       finding on our arrival that there were all sorts of rumours about. I think it will be best to
       report at once to our tutor, for he will be sure to hear something."
"I would if I were you."

