<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Auriol or the elixir of life</title><author>Ainsworth, William Harrison (1805-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1850</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
Chapter 5
The Meeting near the Statue
The evening of the third day arrived, and Auriol entered Hyde Park by Stanhope Gate. Glancing
     at his watch, and finding it wanted nearly three-quarters of an hour of the time appointed for
     his meeting with the mysterious stranger, he struck across the park, in the direction of the
     Serpentine River. Apparently he was now perfectly recovered, for his arm was without the
     support of the sling, and he walked with great swiftness. But his countenance was deathly pale,
     and his looks were so wild and disordered, that the few persons he encountered shrank from him
     aghast.
A few minutes’ rapid walking brought him to the eastern extremity of the Serpentine, and
     advancing close to the edge of the embankment, he gazed at the waters beneath his feet.
“I would plunge into them, if I could find repose,” he murmured. “But it would avail nothing.
     I should only add to my sufferings. No; I must continue to endure the weight of a life burdened
     by crime and remorse, till I can find out the means of freeing myself from it. Once I dreaded
     this unknown danger, but now I seek for it in vain.”
The current of his thoughts was here interrupted by the sudden appearance of a dark object on
     the surface of the water, which he at first took to be a huge fish, with a pair of green fins
     springing from its back; but after watching it more closely for a few moments, he became
     convinced that it was a human being, tricked out in some masquerade attire, while the slight
     struggles which it made proved that life was not entirely extinct.
Though, the moment before, he had contemplated self-destruction, and had only been restrained
     from the attempt by the certainty of failing in his purpose, instinct prompted him to rescue
     the perishing creature before him. Without hesitation, therefore, and without tarrying to
     divest himself of his clothes, he dashed into the water, and striking out, instantly reached
     the object of his quest, which still continued to float, and turning it over, for the face was
     downwards, he perceived it was an old man, of exceedingly small size, habited in a pantomimic
     garb. He also remarked that a rope was twisted round the neck of the unfortunate being, making
     it evident that some violent attempt had been made upon his life.
Without pausing for further investigation, he took firm hold of the leathern wings of the
     dwarf, and with his disengaged hand propelled himself towards the shore, dragging the other
     after him. The next instant he reached the bank, clambered up the low brickwork, and placed his
     burden in safety.
The noise of the plunge had attracted attention, and several persons now hurried to the spot.
     On coming up, and finding Auriol bending over a water-sprite—for such, at first sight, the
     dwarf appeared—they could not repress their astonishment. Wholly insensible to the presence of
     those around him, Auriol endeavoured to recall where he had seen the dwarf before. All at once,
     the recollection flashed upon him, and he cried aloud, “Why, it is my poor murdered
     grandfather’s attendant, Flapdragon! But no! no!—he must be dead ages ago! Yet the resemblance
     is singularly striking!”
Auriol’s exclamations, coupled with his wild demeanour, surprised the bystanders, and they
     came to the conclusion that he must be a travelling showman, who had attempted to drown his
     dwarf—the grotesque, impish garb of the latter convincing them that he had been exhibited at a
     booth. They made signs, therefore, to each other not to let Auriol escape, and one of them,
     raising the dwarf’s head on his knee, produced a flask, and poured some brandy from it down his
     throat, while others chafed his hands. These efforts were attended with much speedier success
     than might have been anticipated. After a struggle or two for respiration, the dwarf opened his
     eyes, and gazed at the group around him.
“It must be Flapdragon!” exclaimed Auriol.
“Ah! who calls me?” cried the dwarf.
“I!” rejoined Auriol. “Do you not recollect me?”
“To be sure!” exclaimed the dwarf, gazing at him fixedly; “you are——” and he stopped.
“You have been thrown into the water, Master Flapdragon?” cried a bystander, noticing the
     cord round the dwarf’s throat.
“I have,” replied the little old man.
“By your governor—that is, by this person?” cried another, laying hold of Auriol.
“By him—no,” said the dwarf; “I have not seen that gentleman for nearly three centuries.”
“Three centuries, my little patriarch?” said the man who had given him the brandy. “That’s a
     long time. Think again.”
“It’s perfectly true, nevertheless,” replied the dwarf.
“His wits have been washed away by the water,” said the first speaker. “Give him a drop more
     brandy.”
“Not a bit of it,” rejoined the dwarf; “my senses were never clearer than at this moment. At
     last we have met,” he continued, addressing Auriol, “and I hope we shall not speedily part
     again. We hold life by the same tie.”
“How came you in the desperate condition in which I found you?” demanded Auriol
     evasively.
“I was thrown into the canal with a stone to my neck, like a dog about to be drowned,”
     replied the dwarf. “But, as you are aware, I’m not so easily disposed of.”
Again the bystanders exchanged significant looks.
“By whom was the attempt made?” inquired Auriol.
“I don’t know the villain’s name,” rejoined the dwarf, “but he’s a very tall, dark man, and
     is generally wrapped in a long black cloak.”
“Ha!” exclaimed Auriol. “When was it done?”
“Some nights ago, I should fancy,” replied the dwarf, “for I’ve been a terrible long time
     under water. I have only just managed to shake off the stone.”
At this speech there was a titter of incredulity among the bystanders.
“You may laugh, but it’s true!” cried the dwarf angrily.
“We must speak of this anon,” said Auriol. “Will you convey him to the nearest tavern?” he
     added, placing money in the hands of the man who held the dwarf in his arms.
“Willingly, sir,” replied the man. “I’ll take him to the Life Guardsman, near the
     barracks—that’s the nearest public.”
“I’ll join him there in an hour,” replied Auriol, moving away.
And as he disappeared, the man took up his little burden, and bent his steps towards the
     barracks.
Utterly disregarding the dripping state of his habiliments, Auriol proceeded quickly to the
     place of rendezvous. Arrived there, he looked around, and not seeing any one, flung himself
     upon a bench at the foot of the gentle eminence on which the gigantic statue of Achilles is
     placed.
It was becoming rapidly dark, and heavy clouds, portending speedy rain, increased the gloom.
     Auriol’s thoughts were sombre as the weather and the hour, and he fell into a deep fit of
     abstraction, from which he was roused by a hand laid on his shoulder.
Recoiling at the touch, he raised his eyes, and beheld the stranger leaning over him, and
     gazing at him with a look of diabolical exultation. The cloak was thrown partly aside, so as to
     display the tall, gaunt figure of its wearer; while the large collar of sable fur with which it
     was decorated stood out like the wings of a demon. The stranger’s hat was off, and his high
     broad forehead, white as marble, was fully revealed.
“Our meeting must be brief,” he said. “Are you prepared to fulfil the compact?”
“What do you require?” replied Auriol.
“Possession of the girl I saw three days ago,” said the other; “the iron-merchant’s daughter,
     Ebba. She must be mine.”
“Never!” cried Auriol firmly—“never!”
“Beware how you tempt me to exert my power,” said the stranger; “she must be
     mine—or——”
“I defy you!” rejoined Auriol; “I will never consent.”
“Fool!” cried the other, seizing him by the arm, and fixing a withering glance upon him.
     “Bring her to me ere the week be out, or dread my vengeance!”
And, enveloping himself in his cloak, he retreated behind the statue, and was lost to
     view.
As he disappeared, a moaning wind arose, and heavy rain descended. Still Auriol did not quit
     the bench.
</div></body></text></TEI>