<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Auriol or the elixir of life</title><author>Ainsworth, William Harrison (1805-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1850</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
Chapter 3
The Hand and the Cloak
A furious barking from Mr. Ginger’s dogs, shortly after the departure of the drowsy youth,
     announced the approach of a grotesque-looking little personage, whose shoulders barely reached
     to a level with the top of the table. This was Old Parr. The dwarfs head was much too large for
     his body, as is mostly the case with undersized persons, and was covered with a forest of rusty
     black hair, protected by a strangely shaped seal-skin cap. His hands and feet were equally
     disproportioned to his frame, and his arms were so long that he could touch his ankles while
     standing upright. His spine was crookened, and his head appeared buried in his breast. The
     general character of his face seemed to appertain to the middle period of life; but a closer
     inspection enabled the beholder to detect in it marks of extreme old age. The nose was broad
     and flat, like that of an ourang-outang; the resemblance to which animal was heightened by a
     very long upper lip, projecting jaws, almost total absence of chin, and a retreating forehead.
     The little old man’s complexion was dull and swarthy, but his eyes were keen and sparkling.
His attire was as singular as his person. Having recently served as double to a famous
     demon-dwarf at the Surrey Theatre, he had become possessed of a cast-off pair of tawny tights,
     an elastic shirt of the same material and complexion, to the arms of which little green
     bat-like wings were attached, while a blood-red tunic with vandyke points was girded round his
     waist. In this strange apparel his diminutive limbs were encased, while additional warmth was
     afforded by the greatcoat already mentioned, the tails of which swept the floor after him like
     a train.
Having silenced his dogs with some difficulty, Mr. Ginger burst into a roar of laughter,
     excited by the little old man’s grotesque appearance, in which he was joined by the Tinker; but
     the Sandman never relaxed a muscle of his sullen countenance.
Their hilarity, however, was suddenly checked by an inquiry from the dwarf, in a shrill, odd
     tone, “Whether they had sent for him only to laugh at him?”
“Sartainly not, deputy,” replied the Tinker. “Here, lazy-bones, glasses o’ rum-an’-vater, all
     round.”
The drowsy youth bestirred himself to execute the command. The spirit was brought; water was
     procured from the boiling copper; and the Tinker handed his guest a smoking rummer, accompanied
     with a polite request to make himself comfortable.
Opposite the table at which the party were seated, it has been said, was a staircase—old and
     crazy, and but imperfectly protected by a broken hand-rail. Midway up it stood a door equally
     dilapidated, but secured by a chain and lock, of which Old Parr, as deputy-chamberlain, kept
     the key. Beyond this point the staircase branched off on the right, and a row of stout wooden
     banisters, ranged like the feet of so many cattle, was visible from beneath. Ultimately, the
     staircase reached a small gallery, if such a name can be applied to a narrow passage
     communicating with the bedrooms, the doors of which, as a matter of needful precaution, were
     locked outside; and as the windows were grated, no one could leave his chamber without the
     knowledge of the landlord or his representative. No lights were allowed in the bedrooms, nor in
     the passage adjoining them.
Conciliated by the Tinker’s offering, Old Parr mounted the staircase, and planting himself
     near the door, took off his greatcoat, and sat down upon it. His impish garb being thus more
     fully displayed, he looked so unearthly and extraordinary that the dogs began to howl
     fearfully, and Ginger had enough to do to quiet them.
Silence being at length restored, the Tinker, winking slyly at his companions, opened the
     conversation.
“I say, deputy,” he observed, “ve’ve bin havin’ a bit o’ a dispute vich you can settle for
     us.”
“Well, let’s see,” squeaked the dwarf. “What is it?”
“Vy, it’s relative to your age,” rejoined the Tinker. “Ven wos you born?”
“It’s so long ago, I can’t recollect,” returned Old Parr rather sulkily.
“You must ha’ seen some changes in your time?” resumed the Tinker, waiting till the little
     old man had made some progress with his grog.
“I rayther think I have—a few,” replied Old Parr, whose tongue the generous liquid had
     loosened. “I’ve seen this great city of London pulled down, and built up again—if that’s
     anything. I’ve seen it grow, and grow, till it has reached its present size. You’ll scarcely
     believe me, when I tell you, that I recollect this Rookery of ours—this foul vagabond
     neighbourhood—an open country field, with hedges round it, and trees. And a lovely spot it was.
     Broad Saint Giles’s, at the time I speak of, was a little country village, consisting of a few
     straggling houses standing by the roadside, and there wasn’t a single habitation between it and
     Convent Garden (for so the present market was once called); while that garden, which was fenced
     round with pales, like a park, extended from Saint Martin’s Lane to Drury House, a great
     mansion situated on the easterly side of Drury Lane, amid a grove of beautiful timber.”
“My eyes!” cried Ginger, with a prolonged whistle; “the place must be preciously
     transmogrified indeed!”
“If I were to describe the changes that have taken place in London since I’ve known it, I
     might go on talking for a month,” pursued Old Parr. “The whole aspect of the place is altered.
     The Thames itself is unlike the Thames of old. Its waters were once as clear and bright above
     London Bridge as they are now at Kew or Richmond; and its banks, from Whitefriars to Scotland
     Yard, were edged with gardens. And then the thousand gay wherries and gilded barges that
     covered its bosom—all are gone—all are gone!”
“Those must ha’ been nice times for the jolly young vatermen vich at Black friars wos used
     for to ply,” chanted the Tinker; “but the steamers has put their noses out o’ joint.”
“True,” replied Old Parr; “and I, for one, am sorry for it. Remembering, as I do, what the
     river used to be when enlightened by gay craft and merry company, I can’t help wishing its
     waters less muddy, and those ugly coal-barges, lighters, and steamers away. London is a mighty
     city, wonderful to behold and examine, inexhaustible in its wealth and power; but in point of
     beauty it is not to be compared with the city of Queen Bess’s days. You should have seen the
     Strand then—a line of noblemen’s houses—and as to Lombard Street and Gracechurch Street, with
     their wealthy goldsmiths’ shops—but I don’t like to think of ’em.”
“Vell, I’m content vith Lunnun as it is,” replied the Tinker, “‘specially as there ain’t much
     chance o’ the ould city bein’ rewived.”
“Not much,” replied the dwarf, finishing his glass, which was replenished at a sign from the
     Tinker.
“I s’pose, my wenerable, you’ve seen the king as bequeathed his name to these pretty
     creaters,” said Ginger, raising his coat-pockets, so as to exhibit the heads of the two little
     black-and-tan spaniels.
“What! old Rowley?” cried the dwarf—“often. I was page to his favourite mistress, the Duchess
     of Cleveland, and I have seen him a hundred times with a pack of dogs of that description at
     his heels.”
“Old Rowley wos a king arter my own ‘art,” said Ginger, rising and lighting a pipe at the
     fire. “He loved the femi-nine specious as well as the ca-nine specious. Can
     you tell us anythin’ more about him?”
“Not now,” replied Old Parr. “I’ve seen so much, and heard so much, that my brain is quite
     addled. My memory sometimes deserts me altogether, and my past life appears like a dream.
     Imagine what my feelings must be, to walk through streets, still called by the old names, but
     in other respects wholly changed. Oh! if you could but have a glimpse of Old London, you would
     not be able to endure the modern city. The very atmosphere was different from that which we now
     breathe, charged with the smoke of myriads of sea-coal fires; and the old picturesque houses
     had a charm about them, which the present habitations, however commodious, altogether
     want.”
“You talk like one o’ them smart chaps they calls, and werry properly, penny-a-liars,”
     observed Ginger. “But you make me long to ha’ lived i’ those times.”
“If you had lived in them, you would have belonged to Paris Garden, or the
     bull-baiting and bear-baiting houses in Southwark,” replied Old Parr. “I’ve seen fellows just
     like you at each of those places. Strange, though times and fashions change, men continue the
     same. I often meet a face that I can remember in James the First’s time. But the old places are
     gone—clean gone!”
“Accordin’ to your own showin’, my wenerable friend, you must ha’ lived uppards o’ two
     hundred and seventy year,” said Ginger, assuming a consequential manner. “Now, doorin’ all that
     time, have you never felt inclined to kick the bucket?”
“Not the least,” replied Old Parr. “My bodily health has been excellent. But, as I have just
     said, my intellects are a little impaired.”
“Not a little, I should think,” replied Ginger, hemming significantly. “I don’t know vether
     you’re a deceivin’ of us or yourself, my wenerable; but von thing’s quite clear—you
      can’t have lived all that time. It’s not in nater.”
“Very well, then—I haven’t,” said Old Parr.
And he finished his rum-and-water, and set down the glass, which was instantly filled again
     by the drowsy youth.
“You’ve seen some picters o’ Old Lunnon, and they’ve haanted you in your dreams, till you’ve
     begun to fancy you lived in those times,” said Ginger.
“Very likely,” replied Old Parr—“very likely.”
There was something, however, in his manner calculated to pique the dog-fancier’s
     curiosity.
“How comes it,” he said, stretching out his legs, and arranging his neckcloth,—“how comes it,
     if you’ve lived so long, that you ain’t higher up in the stirrups—better off, as folks
     say?”
The dwarf made no reply, but covering his face with his hands, seemed a prey to deep emotion.
     After a few moments’ pause, Ginger repeated the question.
“If you won’t believe what I tell you, it’s useless to give an answer,” said Old Parr,
     somewhat gruffly.
“Oh yes, I believe you, deputy,” observed the Tinker, “and so does the Sandman.”
“Well, then,” replied the dwarf, “I’ll tell you how it comes to pass. Fate has been against
     me. I’ve had plenty of chances, but I never could get on. I’ve been in a hundred different
     walks of life, but they always led down hill. It’s my destiny.”
“That’s hard,” rejoined the Tinker—“werry hard. But how d’ye account for livin’ so long?” he
     added, winking as he spoke to the others.
“I’ve already given you an explanation,” replied the dwarf.
“Av, but it’s a cur’ous story, and I vants my friends to hear it,” said the Tinker, in a
     coaxing tone.
“Well then, to oblige you, I’ll go through it again,” rejoined the dwarf. “You must know I
     was for some time servant to Doctor Lamb, an old alchemist, who lived during the reign of good
     Queen Bess, and who used to pass all his time in trying to find out the secret of changing lead
     and copper into gold.”
“I’ve known several indiwiduals as has found out that secret, wenerable,” observed Ginger.
     “And ve calls ’em smashers, nowadays—not halchemists.”
“Doctor Lamb’s object was actually to turn base metal into gold,” rejoined Old Parr, in a
     tone of slight contempt. “But his chief aim was to produce the elixir of long life. Night and
     day he worked at the operation;—night and day I laboured with him, until at last we were both
     brought to the verge of the grave in our search after immortality. One night—I remember it
     well,—it was the last night of the sixteenth century,—a young man, severely wounded, was
     brought to my master’s dwelling on London Bridge. I helped to convey him to the laboratory,
     where I left him with the doctor, who was busy with his experiments. My curiosity being
     aroused, I listened at the door, and though I could not distinguish much that passed inside, I
     heard sufficient to convince me that Doctor Lamb had made the grand discovery, and succeeded in
     distilling the elixir. Having learnt this, I went down-stairs, wondering what would next ensue.
     Half-an-hour elapsed, and while the bells were ringing in the new year joyfully, the young man
     whom I had assisted to carry up-stairs, and whom I supposed at death’s door, marched down as
     firmly as if nothing had happened, passed by me, and disappeared, before I could shake off my
     astonishment. I saw at once he had drunk the elixir.”
“Ah!—ah!” exclaimed the Tinker, with a knowing glance at his companions, who returned it with
     gestures of equal significance.
“As soon as he was gone,” pursued the dwarf, “I flew to the laboratory, and there, extended
     on the floor, I found the dead body of Doctor Lamb. I debated with myself what to do—whether to
     pursue his murderer, for such I accounted the young man; but, on reflection, I thought the
     course useless. I next looked round to see whether the precious elixir was gone. On the table
     stood a phial, from which a strong spirituous odour exhaled; but it was empty. I then turned my
     attention to a receiver, connected by a worm with an alembic on the furnace. On examining it, I
     found it contained a small quantity of a bright transparent liquid, which, poured forth into a
     glass, emitted precisely the same odour as the phial. Persuaded this must be the draught of
     immortality, I raised it to my lips; but apprehension lest it might be poison stayed my hand.
     Reassured, however, by the thought of the young man’s miraculous recovery, I quaffed the
     potion. It was as if I had swallowed fire, and at first I thought all was over with me. I
     shrieked out; but there was no one to heed my cries, unless it were my dead master, and two or
     three skeletons with which the walls were garnished. And these, in truth, did seem to hear me;
     for the dead corpse opened its glassy orbs, and eyed me reproachfully; the skeletons shook
     their fleshless arms and gibbered; and the various strange objects, with which the chamber was
     filled, seemed to deride and menace me. The terror occasioned by these fantasies, combined with
     the potency of the draught, took away my senses. When I recovered, I found all tranquil. Doctor
     Lamb was lying stark and stiff at my feet, with an expression of reproach on his fixed
     countenance; and the skeletons were hanging quietly in their places. Convinced that I was proof
     against death, I went forth. But a curse went with me! From that day to this I have
     lived, but it has been in such poverty and distress, that I had better far have died. Besides,
     I am constantly haunted by visions of my old master. He seems to hold converse with me—to lead
     me into strange places.”
“Exactly the case with the t’other,” whispered the Tinker to the Sandman. “Have you ever, in
     the coorse o’ your long life, met the young man as drank the ‘lixir?” he inquired of the
     dwarf.
“Never.”
“Do you happen to rekilect his name?”
“No; it has quite escaped my memory,” answered Old Parr.
“Should you rekilect it, if you heerd it?” asked the Tinker.
“Perhaps I might,” returned the dwarf; “but I can’t say.”
“Wos it Auriol Darcy?” demanded the other.
“That was the name,” cried Old Parr, starting up in extreme surprise. “I heard
     Doctor Lamb call him so. But how, in the name of wonder, do you come to know it?”
“Ve’ve got summat, at last,” said the Tinker, with a self-applauding glance at his
     friends.
“How do you come to know it, I say?” repeated the dwarf, in extreme agitation.
“Never mind,” rejoined the Tinker, with a cunning look; “you see I does know some cur’ous
     matters as veil as you, my old file. Yo’ll be good evidence, in case ve vishes to prove the
     fact agin him.”
“Prove what?—and against whom?” cried the dwarf.
“One more questin, and I’ve done,” pursued the Tinker. “Should you know this young man agin,
     in case you chanced to come across him?”
“No doubt of it,” replied Old Parr; “his figure often flits before me in dreams.”
“Shall ve let him into it?” said the Tinker, consulting his companions in a low tone.
“Ay—ay,” replied the Sandman.
“Better vait a bit,” remarked Ginger, shaking his head dubiously. “There’s no hurry.”
“No; ve must decide at vonce,” said the Tinker. “Jist examine them papers,” he added, handing
     the pocket-book to Old Parr, “and favour us vith your opinion on ’em.”
The dwarf was about to unclasp the book committed to his charge, when a hand was suddenly
     thrust through the banisters of the upper part of the staircase, which, as has been already
     stated, was divided from the lower by the door. A piece of heavy black drapery next descended
     like a cloud, concealing all behind it except the hand, with which the dwarf was suddenly
     seized by the nape of the neck, lifted up in the air, and, notwithstanding his shrieks and
     struggles, carried clean off.
Great confusion attended his disappearance. The dogs set up a prodigious barking, and flew to
     the rescue—one of the largest of them passing over the body of the drowsy waiter, who had
     sought his customary couch upon the coals, and rousing him from his slumbers; while the Tinker,
     uttering a fierce imprecation, upset his chair in his haste to catch hold of the dwarf’s legs;
     but the latter was already out of reach, and the next moment had vanished entirely.
“My eyes! here’s a pretty go!” cried Ginger, who, with his back to the fire, had witnessed
     the occurrence in open-mouthed astonishment. “Vy, curse it! if the wenerable ain’t a-taken the
     pocket-book with him! It’s my opinion the devil has flown avay with the old feller. His time
     wos nearer at ‘and than he expected.”
“Devil or not, I’ll have him back agin, or at all events the pocket-book!” cried the Tinker.
     And, dashing up the stairs, he caught hold of the railing above, and swinging himself up by a
     powerful effort, passed through an opening, occasioned by the removal of one of the
     banisters.

Groping along the gallery, which was buried in profound darkness, he shouted to the dwarf,
     but received no answer to his vociferations; neither could he discover any one, though he felt
     on either side of the passage with outstretched hands. The occupants of the different chambers,
     alarmed by the noise, called out to know what was going forward; but being locked in their
     rooms, they could render no assistance.
While the Tinker was thus pursuing his search in the dark, venting his rage and
     disappointment in the most dreadful imprecations, the staircase door was opened by the
     landlord, who had found the key in the greatcoat left behind by the dwarf. With the landlord
     came the Sandman and Ginger, the latter of whom was attended by all his dogs, still barking
     furiously; while the rear of the party was brought up by the drowsy waiter, now wide awake with
     fright, and carrying a candle.
But though every nook and corner of the place was visited—though the attics were searched,
     and all the windows examined—not a trace of the dwarf could be discovered, nor any clue to his
     mysterious disappearance detected. Astonishment and alarm sat on every countenance.
“What the devil can have become of him?” cried the landlord, with a look of dismay.
“Ay, that’s the questin!” rejoined the Tinker. “I begin to be of Ginger’s opinion, that the
     devil himself must have flown avay vith him. No von else could ha’ taken a fancy to him.”
“I only saw a hand and a black cloak,” said the Sandman.
“I thought I seed a pair o’ hoofs,” cried the waiter; “and I’m quite sure I seed a pair o’
     great glitterin’ eyes,” he added, opening his own lacklustre orbs to their widest extent.
“It’s a strange affair,” observed the landlord gravely. “It’s certain that no one has entered
     the house wearing a cloak such as you describe; nor could any of the lodgers, to my knowledge,
     get out of their rooms. It was Old Parr’s business, as you know, to lock ’em up carefully for
     the night.”
“Vell, all’s over vith him now,” said the Tinker; “and vith our affair, too, I’m afeerd.”
“Don’t say die jist yet,” rejoined Ginger. “The wenerable’s gone, to be sure; and the only
     thing he has left behind him, barrin’ his topcoat, is this here bit o’ paper vich dropped out
     o’ the pocket-book as he wos a-takin’ flight, and vich I picked from the floor. It may be o’
     some use to us. But come, let’s go down-stairs. There’s no good in stayin’ here any
     longer.”
Concurring in which sentiment, they all descended to the lower room.
</div></body></text></TEI>