<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Auriol or the elixir of life</title><author>Ainsworth, William Harrison (1805-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1850</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
Chapter 4
The Iron-merchant’s Daughter
A week had elapsed since Auriol Darcy was conveyed to the iron-merchant’s dwelling, after the
     attack made upon him by the ruffians in the ruined house; and though almost recovered from the
     serious injuries he had received, he still remained the guest of his preserver.
It was a bright spring morning, when a door leading to the yard in front of the house opened,
     and a young girl, bright and fresh as the morning’s self, issued from it.
A lovelier creature than Ebba Thorneycroft cannot be imagined. Her figure was
     perfection—slight, tall, and ravishingly proportioned, with a slender waist, little limbs, and
     fairy feet that would have made the fortune of an opera-dancer. Her features were almost
     angelic in expression, with an outline of the utmost delicacy and precision—not cold, classical
     regularity—but that softer and incomparably more lovely mould peculiar to our own clime. Ebba’s
     countenance was a type of Saxon beauty. Her complexion was pure white, tinged with a slight
     bloom. Her eyes were of a serene summer blue, arched over by brows some shades darker than the
     radiant tresses that fell on either cheek, and were parted over a brow smoother than alabaster.
     Her attire was simple but tasteful, and by its dark colour threw into relief the exceeding
     fairness of her skin.
Ebba’s first care was to feed her favourite linnet, placed in a cage over the door. Having
     next patted the head of a huge bulldog who came out of his kennel to greet her, and exchanged a
     few words with two men employed at a forge in the inner part of the building on the right, she
     advanced farther into the yard.
This part of the premises, being strewn with ironwork of every possible shape, presented a
     very singular appearance, and may merit some description. There were heaps of rusty iron chains
     flung together like fishermen’s nets, old iron area-guards, iron kitchen-fenders, old grates,
     safes, piles of old iron bowls, a large assortment of old iron pans and dishes, a ditto of old
     ovens, kettles without number, sledge-hammers, anvils, braziers, chimney-cowls, and
     smoke-jacks.
Stout upright posts, supporting cross-beams on the top, were placed at intervals on either
     side of the yard, and these were decorated, in the most artistic style, with rat-traps,
     man-traps, iron lanterns, pulleys, padlocks, chains, trivets, triangles, iron rods, disused
     street lamps, dismounted cannon, and anchors. Attached to hooks in the cross-beam nearest the
     house hung a row of old horse-shoes, while from the centre depended a large rusty bell. Near
     the dog’s kennel was a tool-box, likewise garnished with horse-shoes, and containing pincers,
     files, hammers, and other implements proper to the smith. Beyond this was an open doorway
     leading to the workshop, where the two men before mentioned were busy at the forge.
Though it was still early, the road was astir with passengers; and many waggons and carts,
     laden with hay, straw, and vegetables, were passing. Ebba, however, had been solely drawn forth
     by the beauty of the morning, and she stopped for a moment at the street gate, to breathe the
     balmy air. As she inhaled the gentle breeze, and felt the warm sunshine upon her cheek, her
     thoughts wandered away into the green meadows in which she had strayed as a child, and she
     longed to ramble amid them again. Perhaps she scarcely desired a solitary stroll; but however
     this might be, she was too much engrossed by the reverie to notice a tall man, wrapped in a
     long black cloak, who regarded her with the most fixed attention, as he passed on the opposite
     side of the road.
Proceeding to a short distance, this personage crossed over, and returned slowly towards the
     iron-merchant’s dwelling. Ebba then, for the first time, remarked him, and was startled by his
     strange, sinister appearance. His features were handsome, but so malignant and fierce in
     expression, that they inspired only aversion. A sardonic grin curled his thin lips, and his
     short, crisply curled hair, raven-black in hue, contrasted forcibly and disagreeably with his
     cadaverous complexion. An attraction like that of the snake seemed to reside in his dark
     blazing eyes, for Ebba trembled like a bird beneath their influence, and could not remove her
     gaze from them. A vague presentiment of coming ill smote her, and she dreaded lest the
     mysterious being before her might be connected in some inexplicable way with her future
     destiny.
On his part, the stranger was not insensible to the impression he had produced, and suddenly
     halting, he kept his eyes riveted on those of the girl, who, after remaining spell-bound, as it
     were, for a few moments, precipitately retreated towards the house.
Just as she reached the door, and was about to pass through it, Auriol came forth. He was
     pale, as if from recent suffering, and bore his left arm in a sling.
“You look agitated,” he said, noticing Ebba’s uneasiness. “What has happened?”
“Not much,” she replied, a deep blush mantling her cheeks. “But I have been somewhat alarmed
     by the person near the gate.”
“Indeed!” cried Auriol, darting forward. “Where is he? I see no one.”
“Not a tall man, wrapped in a long black cloak?” rejoined Ebba, following him cautiously.
“Ha!” cried Auriol. “Has he been here?”
“Then you know the person I allude to?” she rejoined.
“I know some one answering his description,” he replied, with a forced smile.
“Once beheld, the man I mean is not to be forgotten,” said Ebba. “He has a countenance such
     as I never saw before. If I could believe in the ‘evil eye,’ I should be sure he possessed
     it.”
“’Tis he, there can be no doubt,” rejoined Auriol, in a sombre tone.
“Who and what is he, then?” demanded Ebba.
“He is a messenger of ill,” replied Auriol, “and I am thankful he is gone.”

“Are you quite sure of it?” she asked, glancing timorously up and down the road. But the
     mysterious individual could no longer be seen.
“And so, after exciting my curiosity in this manner, you will not satisfy it?” she said.
“I cannot,” rejoined Auriol, somewhat sternly.
“Nay, then, since you are so ungracious, I shall go and prepare breakfast,” she replied. “My
     father must be down by this time.”
“Stay!” cried Auriol, arresting her, as she was about to pass through the door. “I wish to
     have a word with you.”
Ebba stopped, and the bloom suddenly forsook her cheeks.
But Auriol seemed unable to proceed. Neither dared to regard the other; and a profound
     silence prevailed between them for a few moments.
“Ebba,” said Auriol at length, “I am about to leave your father’s house to-day.”
“Why so soon?” she exclaimed, looking up into his face. “You are not entirely recovered
     yet.”
“I dare not stay longer,” he said.
“Dare not!” cried Ebba. And she again cast down her eyes; but Auriol made no reply.
Fortunately the silence was broken by the clinking of the smiths’ hammers upon the anvil.
“If you must really go,” said Ebba, looking up, after a long pause, “I hope we shall see you
     again?”
“Most assuredly,” replied Auriol. “I owe your worthy father a deep debt of gratitude—a debt
     which, I fear, I shall never be able to repay.”
“My father is more than repaid in saving your life,” she replied. “I am sure he will be sorry
     to learn you are going so soon.”
“I have been here a week,” said Auriol. “If I remained longer, I might not be able to go at
     all.”
There was another pause, during which a stout old fellow in the workshop quitted the anvil
     for a moment, and, catching a glimpse of the young couple, muttered to his helpmate—
“I say, Ned, I’m a-thinkin’ our master’ll soon have a son-in-law. There’s pretty plain signs
     on it at yonder door.”
“So there be, John,” replied Ned, peeping round. “He’s a good-lookin’ young feller that. I
     wish ve could hear their discoorse.”
“No, that ain’t fair,” replied John, raking some small coal upon the fire, and working away
     at the bellows.
“I would not for the world ask a disagreeable question,” said Ebba, again raising her eyes,
     “but since you are about to quit us, I must confess I should like to know something of your
     history.”
“Forgive me if I decline to comply with your desire,” replied Auriol. “You would not believe
     me, were I to relate my history. But this I may say, that it is stranger and wilder than any
     you ever heard. The prisoner in his cell is not restrained by more terrible fetters than those
     which bind me to silence.”
Ebba gazed at him as if she feared his reasoning were wandering.
“You think me mad,” said Auriol; “would I were so! But I shall never lose the clear
     perception of my woes. Hear me, Ebba! Fate has brought me into this house. I have seen you, and
     experienced your gentle ministry; and it is impossible, so circumstanced, to be blind to your
     attractions. I have only been too sensible to them—but I will not dwell on that theme, nor run
     the risk of exciting a passion which must destroy you. I will ask you to hate me—to regard me
     as a monster whom you ought to shun rather than as a being for whom you should entertain the
     slightest sympathy.”
“You have some motive in saying this to me,” cried the terrified girl.
“My motive is to warn you,” said Auriol. “If you love me, you are lost—utterly lost!”
She was so startled, that she could make no reply, but burst into tears. Auriol took her
     hand, which she unresistingly yielded.
“A terrible fatality attaches to me, in which you must have no share,” he said, in a solemn
     tone.
“Would you had never come to my father’s house!” she exclaimed, in a voice of anguish.
“Is it, then, too late?” cried Auriol despairingly.
“It is—if to love you be fatal,” she rejoined.
“Ha!” exclaimed Auriol, striking his forehead with his clenched hand. “Recall your
     words—Ebba—recall them—but no, once uttered—it is impossible. You are bound to me for ever. I
     must fulfil my destiny.”
At this juncture a low growl broke from the dog, and, guided by the sound, the youthful
     couple beheld, standing near the gate, the tall dark man in the black cloak. A fiendish smile
     sat upon his countenance.
“That is the man who frightened me!” cried Ebba.
“It is the person I supposed!” ejaculated Auriol. “I must speak to him. Leave me, Ebba. I
     will join you presently.”
And as the girl, half sinking with apprehension, withdrew, he advanced quickly towards the
     intruder.
“I have sought you for some days,” said the tall man, in a stern, commanding voice. “You have
     not kept your appointment with me.”
“I could not,” replied Auriol—“an accident has befallen me.”
“I know it,” rejoined the other. “I am aware you were assailed by ruffians in the ruined
     house over the way. But you are recovered now, and can go forth. You ought to have communicated
     with me.”
“It was my intention to do so,” said Auriol.
“Our meeting cannot be delayed much longer,” pursued the stranger. “I will give you three
     more days. On the evening of the last day, at the hour of seven, I shall look for you at the
     foot of the statue in Hyde Park.”
“I will be there,” replied Auriol.
“That girl must be the next victim,” said the stranger, with a grim smile.
“Peace!” thundered Auriol.
“Nay, I need not remind you of the tenure by which you maintain your power,” rejoined the
     stranger. “But I will not trouble you further now.”
And, wrapping his cloak more closely round him, he disappeared.
“Fate has once more involved me in its net,” cried Auriol bitterly. “But I will save Ebba,
     whatever it may cost me. I will see her no more.”
And instead of returning to the house, he hurried away in the opposite direction of the
     stranger.
</div></body></text></TEI>