<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Auriol or the elixir of life</title><author>Ainsworth, William Harrison (1805-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1850</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
Chapter 4
Edith Talbot
It was late when Auriol arose on the following morning. At first, finding himself in a large
     and most luxuriantly-furnished chamber, he was at a loss to conceive how he came there, and it
     was some time before he could fully recall the mysterious events of the previous night. As had
     been foretold, however, by Rougemont, his position did not cause him so much anxiety as
     before.
After attiring himself, he descended to the lower apartments, in one of which a sumptuous
     breakfast awaited him; and having partaken of it, he took a complete survey of the house, and
     found it larger and more magnificent even than he had supposed it. He next supplied himself
     from the pocket-book with a certain sum, for which he fancied he might have occasion in the
     course of the day, and sallied forth. His first business was to procure a splendid carriage and
     horses, and to order some new and rich habiliments to be made with the utmost expedition.
He then proceeded towards May Fair, and knocked at the door of a large house at the upper end
     of Curzon Street. His heart beat violently as he was shown into an elegant drawing-room, and
     his trepidation momentarily increased, until the servant reappeared and expressed his regret
     that he had misinformed him in stating that Miss Talbot was at home. Both she and Mr. Talbot,
     he said, had gone out about half-an-hour ago. Auriol looked incredulous, but without making any
     remark, departed. Hurrying home, he wrote a few lines to Mr. Talbot, announcing the sudden and
     extraordinary change in his fortune, and formally demanding the hand of Edith. He was about to
     despatch this letter, when a note was brought him by his servant. It was from Edith. Having
     ascertained his new address from his card, she wrote to assure him of her constant attachment.
     Transported by this proof of her affection, Auriol half devoured the note with kisses, and
     instantly sent off his own letter to her father—merely adding a few words to say that he would
     call for an answer on the morrow. But he had not to wait thus long for a reply. Ere an hour had
     elapsed, Mr. Talbot brought it in person.
Mr. Talbot was a man of about sixty—tall, thin, and gentlemanlike in deportment, with grey
     hair, and black eyebrows, which lent considerable expression to the orbs beneath them. His
     complexion was a bilious brown, and he possessed none of the good looks which in his daughter
     had so captivated Auriol, and which it is to be presumed, therefore, she inherited from her
     mother.
A thorough man of the world, though not an unamiable person, Mr. Talbot was entirely
     influenced by selfish considerations. He had hitherto looked with an unfavourable eye upon
     Auriol’s attentions to his daughter, from a notion that the connection would be very
     undesirable in a pecuniary point of view; but the magnificence of the house in Saint James’s
     Square, which fully bore out Auriol’s account of his newly-acquired wealth, wrought a complete
     change in his opinions, and he soon gave the young man to understand that he should be
     delighted to have him for a son-in-law. Finding him so favourably disposed, Auriol entreated
     him to let the marriage take place—within three days, if possible.
Mr. Talbot was greatly grieved that he could not comply with his young friend’s request, but
     he was obliged to start the next morning for Nottingham, and could not possibly return under
     three days.
“But we can be married before you go?” cried Auriol.
“Scarcely, I fear,” replied Mr. Talbot, smiling blandly. “You must control your impatience,
     my dear young friend. On the sixth day from this—that is, on Wednesday in next week—we are now
     at Friday—you shall be made happy.”
The coincidence between this appointment, and the time fixed by Rougemont for the delivery of
     his victim, struck Auriol forcibly. His emotion, however, escaped Mr. Talbot, who soon after
     departed, having engaged his future son-in-law to dine with him at seven o’clock.
Auriol, it need scarcely be said, was punctual to the hour, or, rather, he anticipated it. He
     found Edith alone in the drawing-room, and seated near the window, which was filled with
     choicest flowers. On seeing him, she uttered an exclamation of joy, and sprang to meet him. The
     young man pressed his lips fervently to the little hand extended to him.
Edith Talbot was a lovely brunette. Her features were regular, and her eyes, which were
     perfectly splendid, were dark, almond-shaped, and of almost Oriental languor. Her hair, which
     she wore braided over her brow and gathered behind in a massive roll, was black and glossy as a
     raven’s wing. Her cheeks were dimpled, her lips of velvet softness, and her teeth like ranges
     of pearls. Perfect grace accompanied all her movements, and one only wondered that feet so
     small as those she possessed should have the power of sustaining a form which, though
     lightsome, was yet rounded in its proportions.
“You have heard, dear Edith, that your father has consented to our union?” said Auriol, after
     gazing at her for a few moments in silent admiration.
Edith murmured an affirmative, and blushed deeply.
“He has fixed Wednesday next,” pursued Auriol; “but I wish an earlier day could have been
     named. I have a presentiment that if our marriage is so long delayed, it will not take place at
     all.”
“You are full of misgivings, Auriol,” she replied.
“I confess it,” he said; “and my apprehensions have risen to such a point, that I feel
     disposed to urge you to a private marriage, during your father’s absence.”
“Oh no, Auriol; much as I love you, I could never consent to such a step,” she cried. “You
     cannot urge me to it. I would not abuse my dear father’s trusting love. I have never deceived
     him, and that is the best assurance I can give you that I shall never deceive you.”
Further conversation was interrupted by the entrance of Mr. Talbot, who held out both his
     hands to Auriol, and professed the greatest delight to see him. And no doubt he was sincere.
     The dinner passed off most pleasantly, and so did the evening; for the old gentleman was in
     high spirits, and his hilarity was communicated to the young couple. When Auriol and Mr. Talbot
     went up-stairs to tea, they found that Edith’s aunt, Mrs. Maitland, had arrived to take charge
     of her during her father’s absence. This lady had always exhibited a partiality for Auriol, and
     had encouraged his suit to her niece; consequently she was well satisfied with the turn affairs
     had taken. It was near midnight before Auriol could tear himself away; and when he rose to
     depart, Mr. Talbot, who had yawned frequently, but fruitlessly, to give him a hint, told him he
     might depend upon seeing him back on the evening of the third day, and in the meantime he
     committed him to the care of Mrs. Maitland and Edith.
Three days flew by rapidly and delightfully; and on the evening of the last, just as the
     little party were assembled in the drawing-room, after dinner, Mr. Talbot returned from this
     journey.
“Well, here I am!” he cried, clasping Edith to his bosom, “without having encountered any
     misadventure. On the contrary, I have completed my business to my entire satisfaction.”
“Oh, how delighted I am to see you, dear papa!” exclaimed Edith. “Now, Auriol, you can have
     no more apprehensions.”
“Apprehensions of what?” cried Mr. Talbot.
“Of some accident befalling you, which might have interfered with our happiness, sir,”
     replied Auriol.
“Oh, lovers are full of idle fears!” cried Mr. Talbot. “They are unreasonable beings.
     However, here I am, as I said before, safe and sound. To-morrow we will finish all preliminary
     arrangements, and the day after you shall be made happy—ha! ha!”
“Do you know, papa, Auriol intends to give a grand ball on our wedding-day, and has invited
     all his acquaintance to it?” remarked Edith.
“I hope you have not invited Cyprian Rougemont?” said Mr. Talbot, regarding him fixedly.
“I have not, sir,” replied Auriol, turning pale. “But why do you particularise him?”
“Because I have heard some things of him not much to his credit,” replied Mr. Talbot.
“What—what have you heard, sir?” demanded Auriol.
“Why, one shouldn’t believe all the ill one hears of a man; and, indeed, I cannot
     believe all I have heard of Cyprian Rougemont,” replied Mr. Talbot; “but I should be glad if
     you dropped his acquaintance altogether. And now let us change the subject.”
Mr. Talbot seated himself beside Mrs. Maitland, and began to give her some account of his
     journey, which appeared to have been as pleasant as it had been rapid.
Unable to shake off the gloom which had stolen over him, Auriol took his leave, promising to
     meet Mr. Talbot at his lawyer’s in Lincoln’s Inn, at noon on the following day. He was there at
     the time appointed, and, to Mr. Talbot’s great delight, and the no small surprise of the
     lawyer, paid over a hundred thousand pounds, to be settled on his future wife.
“You are a perfect man of honour, Auriol,” said Mr. Talbot, clapping him on the shoulder,
     “and I hope Edith will make you an excellent wife. Indeed, I have no doubt of it.”
“Nor I,—if I ever possess her,” mentally ejaculated Auriol.
The morning passed in other preparations. In the evening the lovers met as usual, and
     separated with the full persuasion, on Edith’s part at least, that the next day would make them
     happy. Since the night of the compact, Auriol had neither seen Rougemont, nor heard from him,
     and he neglected no precaution to prevent his intrusion.
</div></body></text></TEI>