<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Auriol or the elixir of life</title><author>Ainsworth, William Harrison (1805-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1850</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="14">
Chapter 2
The Compact
About two months after this occurrence, and near midnight, a young man was hurrying along
     Pall Mall, with a look of the wildest despair, when his headlong course was suddenly arrested
     by a strong grasp, while a familiar voice sounded in his ear.
“It is useless to meditate self-destruction, Auriol Darcy,” cried the person who had checked
     him. “If you find life a burden, I can make it tolerable to you.”
Turning round at the appeal, Auriol beheld a tall man, wrapped in a long black cloak, whose
     sinister features were well known to him.
“Leave me, Rougemont!” he cried fiercely. “I want no society—above all, not yours. You know
     very well that you have ruined me, and that nothing more is to be got from me. Leave me, I say,
     or I may do you a mischief.”
“Tut, tut, Auriol, I am your friend!” replied Rougemont. “I purpose to relieve your
     distress.”
“Will you give me back the money you have won from me?” cried Auriol. “Will you pay my
     inexorable creditors? Will you save me from a prison?”
“I will do all this, and more,” replied Rougemont. “I will make you one of the richest men in
     London.”
“Spare your insulting jests, sir,” cried Auriol. “I am in no mood to bear them.”
“I am not jesting,” rejoined Rougemont. “Come with me, and you shall be convinced of my
     sincerity.”
Auriol at length assented, and they turned into Saint James’s Square, and paused before a
     magnificent house. Rougemont ascended the steps. Auriol, who had accompanied him almost
     mechanically, gazed at him with astonishment.
“Do you live here?” he inquired.
“Ask no questions,” replied Rougemont, knocking at the door, which was instantly opened by a
     hall porter, while other servants in rich liveries appeared at a distance. Rougemont addressed
     a few words in an undertone to them, and they instantly bowed respectfully to Auriol, while the
     foremost of them led the way up a magnificent staircase.
All this was a mystery to the young man, but he followed his conductor without a word, and
     was presently ushered into a gorgeously-furnished and brilliantly-illuminated apartment.
The servant then left them; and as soon as he was gone Auriol exclaimed, “Is it to mock me
     that you have brought me hither?”
“To mock you—no,” replied Rougemont. “I have told you that I mean to make you rich. But you
     look greatly exhausted. A glass of wine will revive you.”
And as he spoke, he stepped towards a small cabinet, and took from it a curiously-shaped
     bottle and a goblet.
“Taste this wine—it has been long in our family,” he added, filling the cup.
“It is a strange, bewildering drink,” cried Auriol, setting down the empty goblet, and
     passing his hand before his eyes.
“You have taken it upon an empty stomach—that is all,” said Rougemont. “You will be better
     anon.”
“I feel as if I were going mad,” cried Auriol. “It is some damnable potion you have given
     me.”
“Ha! ha!” laughed Rougemont. “It reminds you of the elixir you once quaffed—eh?”
“A truce to this raillery!” cried Auriol angrily. “I have said I am in no mood to bear
     it.”
“Pshaw! I mean no offence,” rejoined the other, changing his manner. “What think you of this
     house?”
“That it is magnificent,” replied Auriol, gazing around. “I envy you its possession.”
“It shall be yours, if you please,” replied Rougemont.
“Mine! you are mocking me again.”
“Not in the least. You shall buy it from me, if you please.”
“At what price?” asked Auriol bitterly.
“At a price you can easily pay,” replied the other. “Come this way, and we will conclude the
     bargain.”
Proceeding towards the farther end of the room, they entered a small exquisitely-furnished
     chamber, surrounded with sofas of the most luxurious description. In the midst was a table, on
     which writing materials were placed.
“It were a fruitless boon to give you this house without the means of living in it,” said
     Rougemont, carefully closing the door. “This pocket-book will furnish you with them.”

“Notes to an immense amount!” cried Auriol, opening the pocket-book, and glancing at its
     contents.
“They are yours, together with the house,” cried Rougemont, “if you will but sign a compact
     with me.”
“A compact!” cried Auriol, regarding him with a look of undefinable terror. “Who and what are
     you?”
“Some men would call me the devil!” replied Rougemont carelessly. “But you know me too well
     to suppose that I merit such a designation. I offer you wealth. What more could you
     require?”
“But upon what terms?” demanded Auriol.
“The easiest imaginable,” replied the other. “You shall judge for yourself.”
And as he spoke, he opened a writing-desk upon the table, and took from it a parchment.
“Sit down,” he added, “and read this.”
Auriol complied, and as he scanned the writing he became transfixed with fear and
     astonishment, while the pocket-book dropped from his grasp.
After a while he looked up at Rougemont, who was leaning over his shoulder, and whose
     features were wrinkled with a derisive smile.
“Then you are the Fiend?” he cried.
“If you will have it so—certainly,” replied the other.
“You are Satan in the form of the man I once knew,” cried Auriol. “Avaunt! I will have no
     dealings with you.”
“I thought you wiser than to indulge in such idle fears, Darcy,” rejoined the other.
     “Granting even your silly notion of me to be correct, why need you be alarmed? You are
     immortal.”
“True,” rejoined Auriol thoughtfully; “but yet——”
“Pshaw!” rejoined the other, “sign, and have done with the matter.”
“By this compact I am bound to deliver a victim—a female victim—whenever you shall require
     it,” cried Auriol.
“Precisely,” replied the other; “you can have no difficulty in fulfilling that
     condition.”
“But if I fail in doing so, I am doomed——”
“But you will not fail,” interrupted the other, lighting a taper and sealing the
     parchment. “Now sign it.”
Auriol mechanically took the pen, and gazed fixedly on the document.
“I shall bring eternal destruction on myself if I sign it,” he muttered.
“A stroke of the pen will rescue you from utter ruin,” said Rougemont, leaning over his
     shoulder. “Riches and happiness are yours. You will not have such another chance.”
“Tempter!” cried Auriol, hastily attaching his signature to the paper. But he instantly
     started back aghast at the fiendish laugh that rang in his ears.
“I repent—give it me back!” he cried, endeavouring to snatch the parchment, which Rougemont
     thrust into his bosom.
“It is too late!” cried the latter, in a triumphant tone. “You are mine—irredeemably
     mine.”
“Ha!” exclaimed Auriol, sinking back on the couch.
“I leave you in possession of your house,” pursued Rougemont; “but I shall return in a week,
     when I shall require my first victim.”
“Your first victim! oh, Heaven!” exclaimed Auriol.
“Ay, and my choice falls on Edith Talbot!” replied Rougemont.
“Edith Talbot!” exclaimed Auriol; “she your victim! Think you I would resign her I love
     better than life to you?”
“It is because she loves you that I have chosen her,” rejoined Rougemont, with a bitter
     laugh. “And such will ever be the case with you. Seek not to love again, for your passion will
     be fatal to the object of it. When the week has elapsed, I shall require Edith at your hands.
     Till then, farewell!”
“Stay!” cried Auriol. “I break the bargain with thee, fiend. I will have none of it. I abjure
     thee.”
And he rushed wildly after Rougemont, who had already gained the larger chamber; but, ere he
     could reach him, the mysterious individual had passed through the outer door, and when Auriol
     emerged upon the gallery, he was nowhere to be seen.
Several servants immediately answered the frantic shouts of the young man, and informed him
     that Mr. Rougemont had quitted the house some moments ago, telling them that their master was
     perfectly satisfied with the arrangements he had made for him.
“And we hope nothing has occurred to alter your opinion, sir?” said the hall porter.
“You are sure Mr. Rougemont is gone?” cried Auriol.
“Oh, quite sure, sir,” cried the hall porter. “I helped him on with his cloak myself. He said
     he should return this day week.”
“If he comes I will not see him,” cried Auriol sharply; “mind that. Deny me to him; and on no
     account whatever let him enter the house.”
“Your orders shall be strictly obeyed,” replied the porter, staring with surprise.
“Now leave me,” cried Auriol.
And as they quitted him, he added, in a tone and with a gesture of the deepest despair, “All
     precautions are useless. I am indeed lost!”
</div></body></text></TEI>