
CHAPTER XV.
ON THE WATCH.
Upon a lowering morning late in November, with the yellow fog low upon the flat meadows, and
     the blinded cattle groping their way through the dim obscurity, and blundering stupidly against
     black and leafless hedges, or stumbling into ditches, undistinguishable in the hazy atmosphere;
     with the village church looming brown and dingy through the uncertain light; with every winding
     path and cottage door, every gable end and gray old chimney, every village child and straggling
     cur seeming strange and weird of aspect in the semi-darkness, Phoebe Marks and her Cousin Luke
     made their way through the churchyard of Audley, and presented themselves before a shivering
     curate, whose surplice hung in damp folds, soddened by the morning mist, and whose temper was
     not improved by his having waited five minutes for the bride and bridegroom.
Luke Marks, dressed in his ill-fitting Sunday clothes, looked by no means handsomer than in
     his every-day apparel; but Phoebe, arrayed in a rustling silk of delicate gray, that had been
     worn about half a dozen times by her mistress, looked, as the few spectators of the ceremony
     remarked, "quite the lady."
A very dim and shadowy lady, vague of outline, and faint of coloring, with eyes, hair,
     complexion and dress all melting into such pale and uncertain shades that, in the obscure light
     of the foggy November morning a superstitious stranger might have mistaken the bride for the
     ghost of some other bride, dead and buried in the vault below the church.
Mr. Luke Marks, the hero of the occasion, thought very little of all this. He had secured the
     wife of his choice, and the object of his life-long ambition—a public house. My lady had
     provided the seventy-five pounds necessary for the purchase of the good-will and fixtures, with
     the stock of ales and spirits, of a small inn in the center of a lonely little village, perched
     on the summit of a hill, and called Mount Stanning. It was not a very pretty house to look at;
     it had something of a tumble-down, weather-beaten appearance, standing, as it did, upon high
     ground, sheltered only by four or five bare and overgrown poplars, that had shot up too rapidly
     for their strength, and had a blighted, forlorn look in consequence. The wind had had its own
     way with the Castle Inn, and had sometimes made cruel use of its power. It was the wind that
     battered and bent the low, thatched roofs of outhouses and stables, till they hung over and
     lurched forward, as a slouched hat hangs over the low forehead of some village ruffian; it was
     the wind that shook and rattled the wooden shutters before the narrow casements, till they hung
     broken and dilapidated upon their rusty hinges; it was the wind that overthrew the pigeon
     house, and broke the vane that had been imprudently set up to tell the movements of its
     mightiness; it was the wind that made light of any little bit of wooden trellis-work, or
     creeping plant, or tiny balcony, or any modest decoration whatsoever, and tore and scattered it
     in its scornful fury; it was the wind that left mossy secretions on the discolored surface of
     the plaster walls; it was the wind, in short, that shattered, and ruined, and rent, and
     trampled upon the tottering pile of buildings, and then flew shrieking off, to riot and glory
     in its destroying strength. The dispirited proprietor grew tired of his long struggle with this
     mighty enemy; so the wind was left to work its own will, and the Castle Inn fell slowly to
     decay. But for all that it suffered without, it was not the less prosperous within doors.
     Sturdy drovers stopped to drink at the little bar; well-to-do farmers spent their evenings and
     talked politics in the low, wainscoted parlor, while their horses munched some suspicious
     mixture of moldy hay and tolerable beans in the tumble-down stables. Sometimes even the members
     of the Audley hunt stopped to drink and bait their horses at the Castle Inn; while, on one
     grand and never-to-be-forgotten occasion, a dinner had been ordered by the master of the hounds
     for some thirty gentlemen, and the proprietor driven nearly mad by the importance of the
     demand.
So Luke Marks, who was by no means troubled with an eye for the beautiful, thought himself
     very fortunate in becoming the landlord of the Castle Inn, Mount Stanning.
A chaise-cart was waiting in the fog to convey the bride and bridegroom to their new home;
     and a few of the villagers, who had known Phoebe from a child, were lingering around the
     churchyard gate to bid her good-by. Her pale eyes were still paler from the tears she had shed,
     and the red rims which surrounded them. The bridegroom was annoyed at this exhibition of
     emotion.
"What are you blubbering for, lass?" he said, fiercely. "If you didn't want to marry me you
     should have told me so. I ain't going to murder you, am I?"
The lady's maid shivered as he spoke to her, and dragged her little silk mantle closely
     around her.
"You're cold in all this here finery," said Luke, staring at her costly dress with no
     expression of good-will. "Why can't women dress according to their station? You won't have no
     silk gownds out of my pocket, I can tell you."
He lifted the shivering girl into the chaise, wrapped a rough great-coat about her, and drove
     off through the yellow fog, followed by a feeble cheer from two or three urchins clustered
     around the gate.
A new maid was brought from London to replace Phoebe Marks about the person of my lady—a very
     showy damsel, who wore a black satin gown, and rose-colored ribbons in her cap, and complained
     bitterly of the dullness of Audley Court.
But Christmas brought visitors to the rambling old mansion. A country squire and his fat wife
     occupied the tapestried chamber; merry girls scampered up and down the long passages, and young
     men stared out of the latticed windows, watching for southerly winds and cloudy skies; there
     was not an empty stall in the roomy old stables; an extempore forge had been set up in the yard
     for the shoeing of hunters; yelping dogs made the place noisy with their perpetual clamor;
     strange servants herded together on the garret story; and every little casement hidden away
     under some pointed gable, and every dormer window in the quaint old roof, glimmered upon the
     winter's night with its separate taper, till, coming suddenly upon Audley Court, the benighted
     stranger, misled by the light, and noise, and bustle of the place, might have easily fallen
     into young Marlowe's error, and have mistaken the hospitable mansion for a good, old-fashioned
     inn, such as have faded from this earth since the last mail coach and prancing tits took their
     last melancholy journey to the knacker's yard.
Among other visitors Mr. Robert Audley came down to Essex for the hunting season, with half a
     dozen French novels, a case of cigars, and three pounds of Turkish tobacco in his
     portmanteau.
The honest young country squires, who talked all breakfast time of Flying Dutchman fillies
     and Voltigeur colts; of glorious runs of seven hours' hard riding over three counties, and a
     midnight homeward ride of thirty miles upon their covert hacks; and who ran away from the
     well-spread table with their mouths full of cold sirloin, to look at that off pastern, or that
     sprained forearm, or the colt that had just come back from the veterinary surgeon's, set down
     Robert Audley, dawdling over a slice of bread and marmalade, as a person utterly unworthy of
     any remark whatsoever.
The young barrister had brought a couple of dogs with him; and the country gentleman who gave
     fifty pounds for a pointer; and traveled a couple of hundred miles to look at a leash of
     setters before he struck a bargain, laughed aloud at the two miserable curs, one of which had
     followed Robert Audley through Chancery Lane, and half the length of Holborn; while his
     companion had been taken by the barrister vi et armis from a coster-monger who was
     ill-using him. And as Robert furthermore insisted on having these two deplorable animals under
     his easy-chair in the drawing-room, much to the annoyance of my lady, who, as we know, hated
     all dogs, the visitors at Audley Court looked upon the baronet's nephew as an inoffensive
     species of maniac.
During other visits to the Court Robert Audley had made a feeble show of joining in the
     sports of the merry assembly. He had jogged across half a dozen ploughed fields on a quiet gray
     pony of Sir Michael's, and drawing up breathless and panting at the door of some farm-house,
     had expressed his intention of following the hounds no further that morning. He had
     even gone so far as to put on, with great labor, a pair of skates, with a view to taking a turn
     on the frozen surface of the fishpond, and had fallen ignominously at the first attempt, lying
     placidly extended on the flat of his back until such time as the bystanders should think fit to
     pick him up. He had occupied the back seat in a dog-cart during a pleasant morning drive,
     vehemently protesting against being taken up hill, and requiring the vehicle to be stopped
     every ten minutes in order to readjust the cushions. But this year he showed no inclination for
     any of these outdoor amusements, and he spent his time entirely in lounging in the
     drawing-room, and making himself agreeable, after his own lazy fashion, to my lady and
     Alicia.
Lady Audley received her nephew's attentions in that graceful half-childish fashion which her
     admirers found so charming; but Alicia was indignant at the change in her cousin's conduct.
"You were always a poor, spiritless fellow, Bob," said the young lady, contemptuously, as she
     bounced into the drawing-room in her riding-habit, after a hunting breakfast, from which Robert
     had absented himself, preferring a cup of tea in my lady's boudoir; "but this year I don't know
     what has come to you. You are good for nothing but to hold a skein of silk or read Tennyson to
     Lady Audley."
"My dear, hasty, impetuous Alicia, don't be violent," said the young man imploringly. "A
     conclusion isn't a five-barred gate; and you needn't give your judgment its head, as you give
     your mare Atalanta hers, when you're flying across country at the heels of an unfortunate fox.
     Lady Audley interests me, and my uncle's county friends do not. Is that a sufficient answer,
     Alicia?"
Miss Audley gave her head a little scornful toss.
"It's as good an answer as I shall ever get from, you, Bob," she said, impatiently; "but pray
     amuse yourself in your own way; loll in an easy-chair all day, with those two absurd dogs
     asleep on your knees; spoil my lady's window-curtains with your cigars and annoy everybody in
     the house with your stupid, inanimate countenance."
Mr. Robert Audley opened his handsome gray eyes to their widest extent at this tirade, and
     looked helplessly at Miss Alicia.
The young lady was walking up and down the room, slashing the skirt of her habit with her
     riding-whip. Her eyes sparkled with an angry flash, and a crimson glow burned under her clear
     brown skin. The young barrister knew very well, by these diagnostics, that his cousin was in a
     passion.
"Yes," she repeated, "your stupid, inanimate countenance. Do you know, Robert Audley, that
     with all your mock amiability, you are brimful of conceit and superciliousness. You look down
     upon our amusements; you lift up your eyebrows, and shrug your shoulders, and throw yourself
     back in your chair, and wash your hands of us and our pleasures. You are a selfish,
     cold-hearted Sybarite—"
"Alicia! Good—gracious—me!"
The morning paper dropped out of his hands, and he sat feebly staring at his assailant.
"Yes, selfish, Robert Audley! You take home half-starved dogs, because you like
     half-starved dogs. You stoop down, and pat the head of every good-for-nothing cur in the
     village street, because you like good-for-nothing curs. You notice little children, and give
     them halfpence, because it amuses you to do so. But you lift your eyebrows a quarter of a yard
     when poor Sir Harry Towers tells a stupid story, and stare the poor fellow out of countenance
     with your lazy insolence. As to your amiability, you would let a man hit you, and say 'Thank
     you' for the blow, rather than take the trouble to hit him again; but you wouldn't go half a
     mile out of your way to serve your dearest friend. Sir Harry is worth twenty of you, though he
      did write to ask if my m-a-i-r Atalanta had recovered from the sprain. He can't
     spell, or lift his eyebrows to the roots of his hair; but he would go through fire and water
     for the girl he loves; while you—"
At this very point, when Robert was most prepared to encounter his cousin's violence, and
     when Miss Alicia seemed about to make her strongest attack, the young lady broke down
     altogether, and burst into tears.
Robert sprang from his easy-chair, upsetting his dogs on the carpet.
"Alicia, my darling, what is it?"
"It's—it's—it's the feather of my hat that got into my eyes," sobbed his cousin; and before
     he could investigate the truth of this assertion Alicia had darted out of the room.
Robert Audley was preparing to follow her, when he heard her voice in the court-yard below,
     amidst the tramping of horses and the clamor of visitors, dogs, and grooms. Sir Harry Towers,
     the most aristocratic young sportsman in the neighborhood, had just taken her little foot in
     his hand as she sprung into her saddle.
"Good Heaven!" exclaimed Robert, as he watched the merry party of equestrians until they
     disappeared under the archway. "What does all this mean? How charmingly she sits her horse!
     What a pretty figure, too, and a fine, candid, brown, rosy face: but to fly at a fellow like
     that, without the least provocation! That's the consequence of letting a girl follow the
     hounds. She learns to look at everything in life as she does at six feet of timber or a sunk
     fence; she goes through the world as she goes across country—straight ahead, and over
     everything. Such a nice girl as she might have been, too, if she'd been brought up in Figtree
     Court! If ever I marry, and have daughters (which remote contingency may Heaven forefend!) they
     shall be educated in Paper Buildings, take their sole exercise in the Temple Gardens, and they
     shall never go beyond the gates till they are marriageable, when I will walk them straight
     across Fleet street to St. Dunstan's church, and deliver them into the hands of their
     husbands."
With such reflections as these did Mr. Robert Audley beguile the time until my lady
     re-entered the drawing-room, fresh and radiant in her elegant morning costume, her yellow curls
     glistening with the perfumed waters in which she had bathed, and her velvet-covered sketch-book
     in her arms. She planted a little easel upon a table by the window, seated herself before it,
     and began to mix the colors upon her palette, Robert watching her out of his half-closed
     eyes.
"You are sure my cigar does not annoy you, Lady Audley?"
"Oh, no indeed; I am quite used to the smell of tobacco. Mr. Dawson, the surgeon, smoked all
     the evening when I lived in his house."
"Dawson is a good fellow, isn't he?" Robert asked, carelessly.
My lady burst into her pretty, gushing laugh.
"The dearest of good creatures," she said. "He paid me five-and-twenty pounds a year—only
     fancy, five-and-twenty pounds! That made six pounds five a quarter. How well I remember
     receiving the money—six dingy old sovereigns, and a little heap of untidy, dirty silver, that
     came straight from the till in the surgery! And then how glad I was to get it! While
      now—I can't help laughing while I think of it—these colors I am using cost a guinea
     each at Winsor & Newton's—the carmine and ultramarine thirty shillings. I gave Mrs. Dawson
     one of my silk dresses the other day, and the poor thing kissed me, and the surgeon carried the
     bundle home under his cloak."
My lady laughed long and joyously at the thought. Her colors were mixed; she was copying a
     water-colored sketch of an impossibly Turneresque atmosphere. The sketch was nearly finished,
     and she had only to put in some critical little touches with the most delicate of her sable
     pencils. She prepared herself daintily for the work, looking sideways at the painting.
All this time Mr. Robert Audley's eyes were fixed intently on her pretty face.
"It is a change," he said, after so long a pause that my lady might have forgotten
     what she had been talking of, "it is a change! Some women would do a great deal to
     accomplish such a change as that."
Lady Audley's clear blue eyes dilated as she fixed them suddenly on the young barrister. The
     wintry sunlight, gleaming full upon her face from a side window, lit up the azure of those
     beautiful eyes, till their color seemed to flicker and tremble betwixt blue and green, as the
     opal tints of the sea change upon a summer's day. The small brush fell from her hand, and
     blotted out the peasant's face under a widening circle of crimson lake.
Robert Audley was tenderly coaxing the crumbled leaf of his cigar with cautious fingers.
"My friend at the corner of Chancery Lane has not given me such good Manillas as usual," he
     murmured. "If ever you smoke, my dear aunt (and I am told that many women take a quiet weed
     under the rose), be very careful how you choose your cigars."
My lady drew a long breath, picked up her brush, and laughed aloud at Robert's advice.
"What an eccentric creature you are, Mr. Audley I Do you know that you sometimes puzzle
     me—"
"Not more than you puzzle me, dear aunt."
My lady put away her colors and sketch book, and seating herself in the deep recess of
     another window, at a considerable distance from Robert Audley, settled to a large piece of
     Berlin-wool work—a piece of embroidery which the Penelopes of ten or twelve years ago were very
     fond of exercising their ingenuity upon—the Olden Time at Bolton Abbey.
Seated in the embrasure of this window, my lady was separated from Robert Audley by the whole
     length of the room, and the young man could only catch an occasional glimpse of her fair face,
     surrounded by its bright aureole of hazy, golden hair.
Robert Audley had been a week at the Court, but as yet neither he nor my lady had mentioned
     the name of George Talboys.
This morning, however, after exhausting the usual topics of conversation, Lady Audley made an
     inquiry about her nephew's friend; "That Mr. George—George—" she said, hesitating.
"Talboys," suggested Robert.
"Yes, to be sure—Mr. George Talboys. Rather a singular name, by-the-by, and certainly, by all
     accounts, a very singular person. Have you seen him lately?"
"I have not seen him since the 7th of September last—the day upon which he left me asleep in
     the meadows on the other side of the village."
"Dear me!" exclaimed my lady, "what a very strange young man this Mr. George Talboys must be!
     Pray tell me all about it."
Robert told, in a few words, of his visit to Southampton and his journey to Liverpool, with
     their different results, my lady listening very attentively.
In order to tell this story to better advantage, the young man left his chair, and, crossing
     the room, took up his place opposite to Lady Audley, in the embrasure of the window.
"And what do you infer from all this?" asked my lady, after a pause.
"It is so great a mystery to me," he answered, "that I scarcely dare to draw any conclusion
     whatever; but in the obscurity I think I can grope my way to two suppositions, which to me seem
     almost certainties."
"And they are—"
"First, that George Talboys never went beyond Southampton. Second, that he never went to
     Southampton at all."
"But you traced him there. His father-in-law had seen him."
"I have reason to doubt his father-in-law's integrity."
"Good gracious me!" cried my lady, piteously. "What do you mean by all this?"
"Lady Audley," answered the young man, gravely, "I have never practiced as a barrister. I
     have enrolled myself in the ranks of a profession, the members of which hold solemn
     responsibilities and have sacred duties to perform; and I have shrunk from those
     responsibilities and duties, as I have from all the fatigues of this troublesome life. But we
     are sometimes forced into the very position we have most avoided, and I have found myself
     lately compelled to think of these things. Lady Audley, did you ever study the theory of
     circumstantial evidence?"
"How can you ask a poor little woman about such horrid things?" exclaimed my lady.
"Circumstantial evidence," continued the young man, as if he scarcely heard Lady Audley's
     interruption—"that wonderful fabric which is built out of straws collected at every point of
     the compass, and which is yet strong enough to hang a man. Upon what infinitesimal trifles may
     sometimes hang the whole secret of some wicked mystery, inexplicable heretofore to the wisest
     upon the earth! A scrap of paper, a shred of some torn garment, the button off a coat, a word
     dropped incautiously from the overcautious lips of guilt, the fragment of a letter, the
     shutting or opening of a door, a shadow on a window-blind, the accuracy of a moment tested by
     one of Benson's watches—a thousand circumstances so slight as to be forgotten by the criminal,
     but links of iron in the wonderful chain forged by the science of the detective officer; and
     lo! the gallows is built up; the solemn bell tolls through the dismal gray of the early
     morning, the drop creaks under the guilty feet, and the penalty of crime is paid."
Faint shadows of green and crimson fell upon my lady's face from the painted escutcheons in
     the mullioned window by which she sat; but every trace of the natural color of that face had
     faded out, leaving it a ghastly ashen gray.
Sitting quietly in her chair, her head fallen back upon the amber damask cushions, and her
     little hands lying powerless in her lap, Lady Audley had fainted away.
"The radius grows narrower day by day," said Robert Audley. "George Talboys never reached
     Southampton."
