
CHAPTER XXV.

'Behold, with pearls they glittering stand,
They peaceful gates to all expand,
By grace and strength divinely shed,
Each mortal, thither maybe led;
Who, kindled by Christ's love will dare
All earthly sufferings now to bear.
By many a salutary stroke,
By many a weary blow, that broke,
Or polished, with a workman's skill,
The stones that form that glorious pile;
They all are fitly framed to lie
In their appointed place on high.'Ancient Hymn for the Dedication of a Church.
The thirtieth of November dawned with the grave brightness of an autumn day, as the
      sun slowly mounted from the golden east, drinking up the mists that rose tardily, leaving the
      grass thickly bedewed.
The bells of Stoneborough Minster were ringing gladsome peals, and the sunshine had newly
      touched the lime trees, whose last bright yellow leaves were gently floating down, as the
      carriage, from the Grange, drew up at Dr. May's door.
Norman opened it, to claim Meta at once for the walk; Mrs. Arnott and Mary had gone on to
      assist Richard in his final
       arrangements, but even before Cocksmoor, with Ethel, was now the care of
      Margaret; and she had waited with her father to keep all bustle from her room, and to commit
      her into the charge of Flora and of nurse. Ethel seemed quite unwilling to go. There was that
      strange oppressed feeling on her as if the attainment of her wishes were joy too great to be
      real—as if she would fain hold off from it at the climax, and linger with the sister who had
      shared all with her, and to whom that Church was even more than to herself. She came back, and
      back again, with fresh injunctions, sometimes forgetting the very purpose of her return, as if
      it had been only an excuse for looking at Margaret's countenance, and drinking in her sympathy
      from her face; but she was to go in George's carriage, and he was not a man to allow of
      loitering. He became so impatient of Ethel's delays, that she perceived that he could bear
      them no longer, gave her final kiss, and whispered, 'In spirit with us!' then ran down and was
      siezed on by George, who had already packed in the children and Miss Bracy, and was whirled
      away.
'Flora dear,' said Margaret, 'do you dislike having the window opened?'
Flora threw it up, protesting, in reply to her sister's scruples, that she liked the air.
      'You always spoilt me,' said Margaret, fondly. 'Come and lie down by me. It is very nice to
      have you here,' she added, as Flora complied; and she took her hand and fondled it. 'It is
      like the old times to have you here taking care of me.'
'Very unlike them in some ways,' said Flora.
'It has been a great renewal of still older times,' said Margaret, 'to have aunt Flora here.
      I hope you will get to know her, Flora, it is so like having mamma here,' and she looked in
      her sister's face as she spoke.
Flora did not reply, but she lay quite still, as if there were a charm in the perfect rest
      of being alone with Margaret, making no effort, and being able to be silent. Time passed on,
      how long they knew not, but, suddenly, a thrill shot through Margaret's frame; she raised her
      hand and lifted her head, with an eager 'Hark!'
Flora could hear nothing.
'The bells—his bells!' said Margaret, all one radiant look of listening, as Flora opened the
      window further, and the breeze wafted in the chime, softened by distance. The carnation tinted
      those thin white cheeks, eyes and smile beamed with joy, and uplifted finger and parted lips
      seemed marking every note of the cadence.
It ceased. 'Alan! Alan!' said she. 'It is enough! I am ready!'
The somewhat alarmed look on Flora's face recalled her, and,
       smiling, she held out her hand for the Consecration books, saying, 'Let us
      follow the service. It will be best for us both.'
Slowly, softly, and rather monotonously, Flora read on, till she had come more than half
      through the first Lesson. Her voice grew husky, and she sometimes paused as if she could not
      easily proceed. Margaret begged her to stop, but she would not cease, and went on reading,
      though almost whispering, till she came to, "If they return to Thee with all their heart and
      with all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have carried them captives,
      and pray toward their land, which Thou gavest unto their fathers, and toward the City which
      Thou hast chosen, and toward the House which I have built for Thy Name; then hear Thou from
      the Heavens, even from Thy dwelling-place—"
Flora could go no further; she strove, but one of her tearless sobs cut her short. She
      turned her face aside, and, as Margaret began to say something tender, she exclaimed, with
      low, hasty utterance, 'Margaret! Margaret! pray for me! for it is a hard captivity, and my
      heart is very, very sore. Oh! pray for me, that it may all be forgiven me—and that I may see
      my child again!'
'My Flora; my own poor, dear Flora! do I not pray? Oh! look up, look up. Think how He loves
      you. If I love you so much, how much more does not He? Come near me, Flora. Be patient, and I
       know peace will come!'
The words had burst from Flora uncontrollably. She was aware, the next instant, that she had
      given way to harmful agitation, and, resuming her quiescence, partly by her own will, partly
      from the soothing effect of Margaret's words and tone, she allowed herself to be drawn close
      to her sister, and hid her face in the pillow, while Margaret's hands were folded over her,
      and words of blessing and prayer were whispered with a fervency that made them broken.
Ethel, meanwhile, stood between Aubrey and Gertrude, hardly able to believe it was not a
      dream, as she beheld the procession enter the Aisle, and heard the Psalm that called on those
      doors to lift up their heads for Him who should enter. There was an almost bewildered
      feeling—could it indeed be true, as she followed the earlier part of the service, which set
      apart that building as a Temple for ever, separate from all common uses. She had imagined the
      scene so often that she could almost have supposed the present, one of her many imaginations;
      but, by-and-by, the strangeness passed off, and she was able to enter into, not merely to
      follow, the prayers, and to feel the deep thanksgiving that such had been the crown of her
      feeble efforts. Margaret was in her mind the whole time, woven, as it were, into every
      supplication and every note of praise; and when there came the intercession for those in
      sickness and suffering,
       flowing into the commemoration of those departed in faith and fear, Ethel's
      spirit sank for a moment at the conviction, that soon Margaret, like him, whom all must bear
      in mind on that day, might be included in that thanksgiving; yet, as the service proceeded,
      leaving more and more of earth behind, and the voices joined with Angel and Archangel, Ethel
      could lose the present grief, and only retain the certainty that, come what might, there was
      joy and union amid those who sung that Hymn of praise. Never had Ethel been so happy— not in
      the sense of the finished work—no, she had lost all that, but in being more carried out of
      herself than ever she had been before, the free spirit of praise so bearing up her heart that
      the cry of Glory came from her with such an exulting gladness, as might surely be reckoned as
      one of those foretastes of our Everlasting Life, not often vouchsafed even to the faithful,
      and usually sent to prepare strength for what may be in store.
The blessing brought the sense of peace, which hung on her even while the sounds of movement
      began, and the congregation were emerging. As she came out, greetings, sentences of admiration
      of the Church, and of enquiry for her absent sisters, were crowded upon her, as people moved
      towards the school, where a luncheon was provided for them, to pass away the interval until
      evening service. The half-dozen oldest Cocksmoorites were, meantime, to have a dinner in the
      former school-room, at the Elwood's house, and Ethel was anxious to see that all was right
      there, so, while the rest of her party were doing civil things, she gave her arm to Cherry,
      whose limping walk shewed her to be very tired.
'Oh! Miss Ethel!' said Cherry, 'if Miss May could only have been here!'
'Her heart is,' said Ethel.
'Well, ma'am, I believe it is. You would not think, ma'am, how all the children take heed to
      anything about her. If I only begin to say "Miss May told me—" they are all like mice.'
'She has done more for the real good of Cocksmoor than anyone else,' said Ethel.
More might have been said, but they perceived that they were being overtaken by the body of
      Clergy, who had been unrobing in the vestry. Ethel hastened to retreat within Mrs. Elwood's
      wicket gate, but she was arrested by Richard, and found herself being presented to the Bishop,
      and the Bishop shaking hands with her, and saying that he had much wished to be introduced to
      her.
Of course, that was because she was her father's daughter, and by way of-something to say.
      She mentioned what was going on at the cottage, whereupon the Bishop wished to go in and see
      the old people; and, entering, they found the very comfortable-looking party
       just sitting down to roast-beef and goose. John Taylor, in a new black coat, on
      account of his Clerkship, presiding at one end, and Mr. Elwood at the other, and Dame Hall
      finding conversation for the whole assembly; while Blanche, Aubrey, Gertrude, the little
      Larkinses, and the Abbotstoke Wilmots were ready to act as waiters with infinite delight. Not
      a whit daunted by the Bishop, who was much entertained by her merry manner, old Granny told
      him 'she had never seen nothing like it since the Jubilee, when the Squire roasted an ox
      whole, and there wasn't none of it fit to eat; and when her poor father got his head broken.
      Well, to be sure, who would have thought what would come of Sam's bringing in the young
      gentleman and lady to see her the day her back was so bad!'
The Bishop said Grace, and left Granny to the goose, while he gave Ethel his arm, which she
      would have thought an unaccountable proceeding if she had not recollected that Richard might
      be considered as host, and that she was his eldest sister forthcoming.
No sooner, however, had they come beyond the wicket than she saw her father speaking to Will
      Adams, and there was that in the air of both which made it no surprise when Dr. May came up,
      saying, 'Ethel, I must carry you away;' and, in explanation to the Bishop, 'my poor girl at
      home is not so well.'
All was enquiry and sympathy. Ethel was frantic to be at home, and would have rushed off at
      once, if Richard had not held her fast, asking what good she would do by hurrying in,
      breathless and exhausted, so as to add to Flora's fright and distress, the anxiety which was
      most upon their minds, since she had never before witnessed one of the seizures, that were
      only too ordinary matters in the eyes of the home party. No one but Dr. May and Ethel should
      go. Richard undertook to tell the rest, and the gig making its appearance, Ethel felt that the
      peculiarly kind manner with which the Bishop pressed her hand, and gave them all good wishes,
      was like a continuation of his blessing to aid her, in her home scene of trial.
Perhaps, it was well for her that her part in the Consecration festivities should end here;
      at least so thought Mr. Wilmot, who, though very sorry for the cause, could not wish her to
      have been present at the luncheon. She had not thought of self hitherto, the Church was the
      gift of Alan and Margaret, the work of preparing the people belonged to all alike, and she did
      not guess that, in the sight of others, she was not the nobody that she believed herself. Her
      share in the work at Cocksmoor was pretty well known, and Dr. Hoxton could not allow a public
      occasion to pass without speeches, such as must either have been very painful, or very hurtful
      to her. The absence of herself and her father, however, permitted a more free utterance to the
      general feeling; and things were said,
       that did indeed make the rest of the family extremely hot and uncomfortable, but
      which gave them extreme pleasure. Norman was obliged to spare Richard the answer, and said
      exactly what he ought, and so beautifully, that Meta could not find it in her heart to echo
      the fervent wish, which he whispered as he sat down, that speechifying could be abolished by
      act of parliament.
Mrs. Arnott began to perceive that her nephew was something to be proud of, and to
      understand how much was sacrificed, while George Rivers expressed his opinion to her that
      Norman would be a crack speaker in the House, and he hoped she would say everything to hinder
      his going out, for it was a regular shame to waste him on the niggers.
Owing to George having constituted himself her squire, Mrs. Arnott had not arrived at an
      understanding of the state of affairs at home; but, as soon they rose up from luncheon, and
      she learnt the truth from Richard and Mary, nothing would hinder her from walking home at once
      to see whether she could be useful. Mary was easily persuaded to remain, for she was
      accustomed to Margaret's having these attacks, and had always been kept out of her room the
      while, so she had little uneasiness to prevent her from being very happy, in receiving in her
      own simple, good-humoured way, all the attentions that lapsed upon her in the place of her
      elder sisters.
'Cocksmoor really has a Church!' was note enough of joy for her, and no one could look at
      her round face without seeing perfect happiness. Moreover, when after evening service, the
      November mist turned into decided rain, she was as happy as a queen in her foresight, which
      had provided what seemed an unlimited supply of cloaks and umbrellas. She appeared to have an
      original genius for making the right people give a lift in their carriages to the distressed;
      and, regarding the Abbotstoke britska as her own, packed in Mrs. Anderson and Fanny, in
      addition to all their own little ones, Meta thrusting Miss Bracy into the demi-corner destined
      for herself at the last minute, and, remaining with Mary, the only ladies obliged to walk back
      to Stoneborough. So delighted were they "at the fun," that it might have been thought the most
      charming of adventures, and they laughed all the more at the lack of umbrellas. They went to
      Mrs. Elwood's, divested themselves of all possible finery, and tucked up the rest; Meta was
      rolled up from head to foot in a great old plaid shawl of Mrs. Elwood's, and Mary had a cloak
      of Richard's, the one took Norman's arm, the other Dr. Spencer's, and they trudged home
      through the darkness and the mud in the highest glee, quite sorry when the carriage met them
      half-way.
It was the last mirth that they enjoyed for many weeks. When they reached home, a sense of
      self-reproach for their glee thrilled
       over them, when they found a sort of hush pervading the drawing-room, and saw
      the faces of awe and consternation, worn by Blanche and George Rivers.
'It was a much worse attack than usual, and it did not go off,' was all that Blanche knew,
      but her father had desired to be told when Dr. Spencer came home, and she went up with the
      tidings.
This brought Flora down, looking dreadfully pale, and with her voice sunk away as it had
      been when she lost her child. Her husband started up, exclaiming at her aspect; she let him
      support her to the sofa, and gave the few particulars. Margaret had been as placid and
      comfortable as usual, till nurse came to dress her, but the first move had brought on the
      faintness and loss of breath. It did not yield to remedies, and she had neither looked nor
      spoken since, only moaned. Flora thought her father much alarmed; and then, after an interval,
      she began to entreat that they might stay there, sending Miss Bracy and the children to the
      Grange to make room.
Meantime, Dr. Spencer had come to the sick room, but he could only suggest remedies that
      were already in course of application to the insensible sufferer. Mrs. Arnott and Ethel were
      watching, and trying everything to relieve her, but with little effect, and Ethel presently
      stood by the fire with her father, as Dr. Spencer turned towards him, and he said, in a very
      low, but calm voice, 'It won't do—I believe it is the death-stroke.'
'Not immediate,' said Dr. Spencer.
'No,' said Dr. May; and he quietly spoke of what the disease had effected, and what yet
      remained for it to do, ere the silver bowl should be broken.
Dr. Spencer put in a word of agreement.
'Will there be no rally?' said Ethel, in the same tone.
'Probably not,' said Dr. May; 'the brain is generally reached at this stage. I have seen it
      coming for a long time. The thing was done seven years ago. There was a rally for a time when
      youth was strong; but suspense and sorrow accelerated what began from the injury to the
      spine.'
Dr. Spencer bowed his head, and looked at him anxiously, saying, 'I do not think there will
      be much acute suffering.'
'I fear it may be as trying,' said Dr. May, sighing; and then turning to Ethel, and throwing
      his arm round her, 'May God make it easy to her, and grant us "patient hearts." We will not
      grudge her to all that she loves best, my Ethel.'
Ethel clung to him, as if to derive strength from him. But the strength that was in them
      then, did not come from earth. Dr. Spencer wrung his hand, and stepped back to the bed to try
       another resource. Vain again, they only seemed to be tormenting her, and the
      silent helplessness prevailed again. Then Dr. May went down to Flora, told her the true state
      of the case, and urged on her to give up her plan of remaining. George joined with him, and
      she yielded submissively, but would not be refused going up once again and kissing her sister,
      standing beside her gazing at her, till her father came softly and drew her away. 'I shall be
      here to-morrow,' she said to Ethel, and went.
The morrow, however, brought no Flora. The agitation and distress of thst day had broken her
      down completely, and she was so ill as to be unable to move. Her aunt went at once to see her,
      and finding that her presence at the Grange relieved some of Dr. May's anxieties, chiefly
      devoted herself to her. Flora was grateful and gentle, but as silent and impenetrable as ever,
      while day after day she lay on her couch, uncomplaining and undemonstrative, visited by her
      father, and watched over by her aunt and sister-in-law, who began to know each other much
      better, though Flora less than ever, in that deep fixed grief. She only roused herself to
      return her husband's affection, or to listen to the daily reports of Margaret. Poor George, he
      was very forlorn, thugh Meta did her best to wait on him, and he rode over twice a day to
      inquire at Stoneborough.
The Doctors were right, and the Consecration morning was her last of full consciousness.
      From the hour when she had heard the sound of Alan's bells, her ears were closed to earthly
      sounds. There was very little power of intercourse with her, as she lingered on the borders of
      the Land very far away, where skill and tenderness could not either reach body or spirit.
      Often the watchers could not tell whether she was conscious, or only incapacitated from
      expression, by the fearful weight on her breath, which caused a restlessness most piteous in
      the exhausted helpless frame, wasted till the softest touch was anguish. Now and then came
      precious gleams when a familiar voice, or some momentary alleviation would gain a smile, or
      thanks, and they thought her less restless when Richard read prayers beside her, but words
      were very rare, only now and then a name, and when in most distress, "it will be soon over,"
      "it will soon be over," occurred so often, that they began to think it once her solace, and
      now repeated habitually without a meaning.
They could not follow her into the valley of the shadow of death, but could only watch the
      frail earthly prison-house being broken down, as if the doom of sin must be borne, though
      faith could trust that it was but her full share in the Cross. Calmly did those days pass.
      Ethel, Richard, and Mary divided between them the watching and the household cares, and their
      father bore up bravely in the fullness
       of his love and faith, resigning his daughter to the Hands which were bearing
      her whither her joys had long since departed.
Hector Ernescliffe arrived when the holidays began; and his agony of sorrow, when she failed
      to recognise him, moved Dr. May to exert himself earnestly for his consolation; and, at the
      same time, Tom, in a gentle, almost humble manner, paid a sort of daughter-like attention to
      the smallest services for his father, as if already accepting him as his especial charge.
It was midnight, on the longest night of the year; Ethel was lying on her bed, and had
      fallen into a brief slumber, when her father's low, clear voice summoned her: 'Ethel, she is
      going!'
There was a change on the face, and the breath came in labouring gasps. Richard lifted her
      head, and her eyes once more opened; she smiled once more.
'Papa!' she said, 'dear papa!'
He threw himself on his knees beside her, but she looked beyond him, 'Mamma! Alan! oh! there
      they are! More! more!' and, as though the unspeakable dawned on her, she gasped for utterance,
      then looked, with a consoling smile, on her father. 'Over now!' she said—and the last struggle
      was ended. That which Richard laid down was no longer Margaret May.
Over now! The twenty-five years' life, the seven years' captivity on her couch, the anxious
      headship of the motherless household, the hopeless betrothal, the long suspense, the efforts
      for resignation, the widowed affections, the slow decay, the tardy, painful death agony—all
      was over; nothing left, save what they had rendered the undying spirit, and the impress her
      example had left on those around her.
The long continuance of the last suffering had softened the actual parting; and it was with
      thankfulness for the cessation of her pain that they turned away, and bade each other
      good-night.
Ethel would not have believed that her first wakening, to the knowledge that Margaret was
      gone, could have been more fraught with relief than with misery. And, for her father, it
      seemed as if it were a home-like, comfortable thought to him, that her mother had one of her
      children with her. He called her the first link of his Daisy Chain drawn up out of sight; and,
      during the quiet days that ensued, he seemed as it were to be lifted above grief, dwelling
      upon hope. His calmness impressed the same on his children, as they moved about in the solemn
      stillness of the house; and when Harry, pale, and shocked at the blow to him so sudden, came
      home, the grave silence soothed his violence of grief; and he sat beside his father or Mary,
      speaking in under-tones of what Margaret had loved to hear from him, of Alan Ernescliffe's
      last moments.

Mary gave way to a burst of weeping when she sought, in vain, for Daisies in the wintry
      garden; but Hector Ernescliffe went down to the Cloisters, and brought back the lingering
      blossoms to be placed on Margaret's bosom.
The dog Toby had followed him, unseen, to the cloister; and he was entering the garden, when
      he was struck by seeing the animal bounding, in irrepressible ecstacy, round a lad, whose
      tarpaulin hat, blue bordered collar, and dark blue dress, shewed him to be a sailor, as well
      as the broad-shouldered, grizzled, elderly man, who stood beside him.
'I say, sir,' said the latter, as Hector's hand was on the door, 'do you belong to Dr.
      May?'
Hector unhesitatingly answered that he did.
'Then, may be, sir, you have heard of one Bill Jennings.'
Hector was all in one flush, almost choking, as he told that he was Mr. Ernescliffe's
      brother, and gave his hand to the sailor. 'What could he do for him?'
Jennings had heard from one of the crew of the Bucephalus that Mr. May had been met, on his
      return to Portsmouth, by the news of his sister's death. The Mays had helped his boy; he had
      been with Mr. May in the island; he had laid Mr. Ernescliffe in his grave; and some notion had
      crossed the sailor that he must be at Miss Margaret's funeral—it might be they would let him
      lend a hand—and, in this expedition, he was spending his time on shore.
How he was welcomed need not be told, nor how the tears came forth from full hearts, as Dr.
      May granted his wish, and thanked him for doing what Margaret herself would indeed have
      chosen; and, in his blue sailor garb, was Jennings added to the bearers, their own men, and
      two Cocksmoor labourers, who, early on Christmas Eve, carried her to the Minster. Last time
      she had been there, Alan Ernescliffe had supported her. Now, what was mortal of him lay
      beneath the palm tree, beneath the glowing summer sky, while the first snow flakes hung like
      pearls on her pall. But, as they laid her by her mother's side, who could doubt that they were
      together?

