
CHAPTER VIII.

The rest all accepted the kind invitation,
And much bustle it caused in the plumed creation;
Such ruffling of feathers, such pruning of coats,
Such chirping, such whistling, such clearing of throats,
Such polishing bills, and such oiling of pinions,
Had never been known in the biped dominions.Peacock at Home.
Etheldred was thankful for that confidence to Meta Rivers, for without it, she
      would hardly have succeeded in spurring Norman up to give the finishing touches to Decius, and
      to send him in. If she talked of the poem as the devotion of Decius, he was willing enough,
      and worked with spirit, for he liked the ideas, and enjoyed the expressing them, and trying to
      bring his lines to his notion of perfection, but if she called it the "Newdigate," or the
      "Prize Poem," and declared herself sure it would be successful, he yawned, slackened, leant
      back in his chair, and began to read other people's poetry, which Ethel was disrespectful
      enough not to think nearly as good as his own.
It was completed at last, and Ethel stitched it up with a narrow red and white ribbon—the
      Balliol colours; and set Meta at him till a promise was extorted that he would send it in.
And, in due time, Ethel received the following note:
My dear Ethel,—
My peacock bubble has flown over the house. Tell them all about it.          Your
      affectionate, N. W. M.
They were too much accustomed to Norman's successes to be extraordinarily excited; Ethel
      would have been much mortified if
       the prize had been awarded to anyone else, but, as it was, it came rather as a
      matter of course. The Doctor was greatly pleased, and said he should drive round by Abbotstoke
      to tell the news there, and then laughed beyond measure to hear that Meta had been in the
      plot, saying, he should accuse the little humming-bird of being a magpie, stealing
      secrets.
By this time, the bride and bridegroom were writing that they thought of soon returning—they
      had spent the early spring at Paris, had wandered about in the south of France, and now were
      at Paris again. Flora's letters were long, descriptive, and affectionate, and she was eager to
      be kept fully informed of everything at home. As soon as she heard of Norman's success, she
      wrote a whole budget of letters, declaring that she and George would hear of no refusal; they
      were going to spend a fortnight at Oxford for the Commemoration, and must have Meta and Ethel
      with them to hear Norman's poem in the theatre.
Dr. May, who already had expressed a hankering to run up for the day, and take Ethel with
      him, was perfectly delighted at the proposal, and so was Mr. Rivers, but the young ladies made
      many demurs. Ethel wanted Mary to go in her stead, and had to be told that this would not be
      by any means the same to the other parties—she could not bear to leave Margaret; it was a long
      time since there had been letters from the Alcestis, and she did not like to miss being at
      home when they should come; and Meta, on her side, was so unwilling to leave her father, that,
      at last, Dr. May scolded them both for a pair of conceited, self-important damsels, who
      thought nothing could go on without them; and next, compared them to young birds, obliged to
      be shoved by force into flying.
Meta consented first, on condition that Ethel would; and Ethel found that her whole house
      would be greatly disappointed if she refused, so she proceeded to be grateful, and then
      discovered how extremely delightful the plan was. Oxford, of which she had heard so much, and
      which she had always wished to see! And Norman's glory—and Meta's company—nay, the very
      holiday, and going from home, were charms enough for a girl of eighteen, who had never been
      beyond Whitford in her life. Besides, to crown all, papa promised that, if his patients would
      behave well, and not want him too much, he would come up for the one great day.
Mr. and Mrs. George Rivers came to Abbotstoke to collect their party. They arrived by a
      railroad, whose station was nearer to Abbotstoke than to Stoneborough, therefore, instead of
      their visiting the High-street by the way, Dr. May, with Ethel, and Mary, were
       invited to dine at the Grange, the first evening—a proposal, at least, as new
      and exciting to Mary, as was the journey to Oxford, to her sister.
The two girls went early, as the travellers had intended to arrive before luncheon, and,
      though Ethel said few words, but let Mary rattle on with a stream of conjectures and
      questions, her heart was full of longings for her sister, as well as of strange doubts and
      fears, as to the change that her new life might have made in her.
'There! there!' cried Mary. 'Yes! it is Flora! Only she has her hair done in a funny
      way!'
Flora and Meta were both standing on the steps before the conservatory, and Mary made but
      one bound before she was hugging Flora. Ethel kissed her without so much violence, and then
      saw that Flora was looking very well and bright, more decidedly pretty and elegant than ever,
      and with certainly no diminution of affection; it was warmer, though rather more
      patronizing.
'How natural you look!' was her first exclamation, as she held Mary's hand, and drew Ethel's
      arm into hers. 'And how is Margaret?'
'Pretty well—but the heat makes her languid—'
'Is there any letter yet?'
'No—'
'I do not see any cause for alarm—letters are so often detained, but, of course, she will be
      anxious.—Has she had pain in the back again.'
'Sometimes, but summer always does her good—'
'I shall see her to-morrow—and the Daisy—How do you all get on? Have you broken down yet,
      Ethel?'
'Oh! we do go on,' said Ethel, smiling; the worst thing I have done was expecting James to
      dress the salads with lamp-oil.'
'A Greenland salad! But don't talk of oil—I have the taste still in my mouth after the
      Pyrennean cookery! Oh! Ethel, you would have been wild with delight in those places!'
'Snowy mountains! Are they not like a fairy-dream to you now? You must have felt at home, as
      a Scotchwoman's daughter.'
'Think of the peaks in the sun-rise! Oh! I wanted you in the pass of Roncevalles, to hear
      the echo of Roland's horn. And we saw the cleft made by Roland's sword in the rocks.'
'Oh! how delightful—and Spain too!'
'Aye, the Isle of Pheasants, where all the conferences took place.'
'Where Louis XIV. met his bride, and François I. sealed his treason with his empty
      flourish—'
'Well, don't let us fight about François I. now; I want to know how Tom likes Eton.'

'He gets on famously. I am so glad he is in the same house with Hector.'
'Mr. Ramsden—how is he?'
'No better—he has not done any duty for weeks. Tomkins and his set want to sell the next
      presentation, but papa hopes to stave that off, for there is a better set than usual in the
      Town Council this year.'
'Cocksmoor? And how are our friends the Muses? I found a note from the secretary telling me
      that I am elected again. How have they behaved?'
'Pretty well,' said Ethel. 'Mrs. Ledwich has been away, so we have had few meetings, and
      have been pretty quiet, except for an uproar about the mistress beating that Franklin's
      girl—and what do you think I did, Flora? I made bold to say the woman should shew her to papa,
      to see if she had done her any harm, and he found that it was all a fabrication from one end
      to the other. So it ended in the poor girl being expelled, and Mary and I have her twice a
      week, to see if there is any grace in her.'
'To reward her!' said Flora. 'That is always your way—'
'Why, one cannot give the poor thing quite up,' said Ethel.
'You will manage the ladies at last!' cried Flora.
'Not while Mrs. Ledwich is there!'
'I'll cope with her! But, come, I want you in my room—'
'May not I come? said Meta. 'I must see when—'
Flora held up her hand, and, while signing invitation, gave an arch look to Meta to be
      silent. Ethel here bethought herself of enquiring after Mr. Rivers, and then for George.
Mr. Rivers was pretty well—George, quite well, and somewhere in the garden; and Meta said
      that he had such a beard that they would hardly know him; while, Flora added, that he was
      delighted with the Oxford scheme.
Flora's rooms had been, already, often shewn to her sisters, when Mr. Rivers had been newly
      furnishing them, with every luxury and ornament that taste could devise. Her dressing room,
      with the large bay window, commanding a beautiful view of Stoneborough, and filled, but not
      crowded, with every sort of choice article, was a perfect exhibition to eyes unaccustomed to
      such varieties.
Mary could have been still amused by the hour, in studying the devices and ornaments on the
      shelves and chiffonieres; and Blanche had romanced about it, to the little ones, till they
      were erecting it into a mythical palace.
And Flora, in her simple, well-chosen dress, looked, and moved, as if she had been born and
      bred in the like.
There were signs of unpacking about the room—Flora's dressing-case
       on the table, and some dresses lying on the sofa and ottoman.
Mary ran up to them eagerly, and exclaimed at the beautiful shot blue and white silk.
'Paris fashions?' said Ethel, carelessly.
'Yes; but I don't parade my own dresses here,' said Flora.
'Whose are they then? Your commissions, Meta?'
'No!' and Meta laughed heartily.
'Your French maid's then?' said Ethel. I dare say she dresses quite as well; and the things
      are too really pretty and simple for an English maid's taste.'
'I am glad you like them,' said Flora, maliciously. 'Now, please to be good.'
'Who are they for then?' said Ethel, beginning to be frightened.
'For a young lady, whose brother has got the Newdigate prize, and who is going to
      Oxford.'
'Me! Those! But I have not got four backs,' as Ethel saw Meta in fits of laughing, and Flora
      making affirmative signs. Mary gave a ponderous spring of ecstacy.
'Come!' said Flora, 'you may as well be quiet. Whatever you may like, I am not going to have
      the Newdigate prizeman shown as brother to a scare-crow. I knew what you would come to,
      without me to take care of you. Look at yourself in the glass.'
'I'm sure I see no harm in myself,' said Ethel, turning towards the pier-glass, and
      surveying herself—in a white muslin, made high, a black silk mantle, and a brown hat. She had
      felt very respectable when she set out, but she could not avoid a lurking conviction that,
      beside Flora and Meta, it had a scanty, school-girl effect. 'And,' she continued, quaintly,
      'besides, I have really got a new gown on purpose—a good useful silk, that papa chose
      at Whitford —just the colour of a copper tea-kettle, where it turns purple.'
'Ethel! you will kill me!' said Meta, sinking back on the sofa.
'And, I suppose,' continued Flora, 'that you have sent it to Miss Broad's, without any
      directions, and she will trim it with flame-coloured gimp, and glass buttons; and, unless
      Margaret catches you, you will find yourself ready to set the Thames on fire. No, my dear
      tea-kettle, I take you to Oxford on my own terms, and you had better submit, without a fuss,
      and be thankful it is no worse. George wanted me to buy you a white brocade, with a perfect
      flower-garden on it, that you could have examined with a microscope. I was obliged to let him
      buy that lace mantle, to make up to him. Now then, Meta, the scene opens, and discovers—'
Meta opened the folding-doors into Flora's bed-room, and thence came forward Bellairs and a
      little brisk Frenchwoman, whom Flora
       had acquired at Paris. The former, who was quite used to adorning Miss Ethel
      against her will, looked as amused as her mistresses; and, before Ethel knew what was going
      on, her muslin was stripped off her back, and that instrument of torture, a half made body,
      was being tried upon her. She made one of her most wonderful grimaces of despair, and stood
      still! The dresses were not so bad after all; they were more tasteful than costly, and neither
      in material nor ornament, were otherwise than suitable to the occasion, and the wearer. It was
      very kind and thoughtful of Flora—that she could not but feel—nothing had been forgotten, but
      when Ethel saw the mantles, the ribbons, the collars, the bonnet, all glistening with the
      French air of freshness and grace, she began to feel doubts and hesitations, whether she ought
      to let her sister go to such an expense on her account, and privately resolved that the
      accepting thanks should not be spoken, till she should have consulted her father.
In the meantime, she could only endure, be laughed at by her elders, and entertained by
      Mary's extreme pleasure in her array. Good Mary—it was more than any comedy to her; she had
      not one moment's thought of herself, till, when Flora dived into her box, produced a pair of
      bracelets, and fastened them on her comfortable plump arms, her eyes grew wide with wonder,
      and she felt, at least, two stages nearer womanhood.
Flora had omitted no one. There was a Paris present for every servant at home, and a
      needle-case even for Cherry Elwood, for which Ethel thanked her with a fervency wanting in her
      own case.
She accomplished consulting her father on her scruples, and he set her mind at rest. He knew
      that the outlay was a mere trifle to the Riverses, and was greatly pleased and touched with
      the affection that Flora showed; so he only smiled at Ethel's doubts, and dwelt with heartfelt
      delight on the beautiful print, that she had brought him from Ary Scheffer's picture of the
      Great Consoler.
Flora was in her glory. To be able to bestow benefits on those whom she loved, had been
      always a favourite vision, and she had the full pleasure of feeling how much enjoyment she was
      causing. They had a very pleasant evening; she gave interesting accounts of their tour, and by
      her appeals to her husband, made him talk also. He was much more animated and agreeable than
      Ethel had ever seen him, and was actually laughing, and making Mary laugh heartily with his
      histories of the inns in the Pyrennees. Old Mr. Rivers looked as proud and happy as possible,
      and was quite young and gay, having evidently forgotten all his maladies, in paying elaborate
      attention to his daughter-in-law.
Ethel told Margaret, that night, that she was quite satisfied about
       Flora—she was glad to own that she had done her injustice, and that Norman was
      right in saying there was more in George Rivers than met the eye.
The morning spent at home was equally charming. Flora came back, with love strengthened by
      absence. She was devoted to Margaret—caressing to all; she sat in her old places; she
      fulfilled her former offices; she gratified Miss Bracy, by visiting her in the school-room,
      and talking of French books; and won golden opinions, by taking Gertrude in her hand, and
      walking to Minster-street, to call on Mrs. Hoxton, as in old times, and take her the newest
      foreign device of working to kill time.
So a few days passed merrily away, and the great journey commenced. Ethel met the Abbotstoke
      party at the station, and, with a parting injunction to her father, that he was to give all
      his patients a sleeping potion, that they might not miss him, she was carried away from
      Stoneborough.
Meta was in her gayest mood; Ethel full of glee and wonder, for once beyond Whitford, the
      whole world was new to her; Flora more quiet, but greatly enjoying their delight, and George
      not saying much, but smiling under his beard, as if well pleased to be so well amused with so
      little trouble.
He took exceeding care of them, and fed them with everything he could make them eat at the
      Swindon station, asking for impossible things, and wishing them so often to change for
      something better, that, if they had been submissive, they would have had no luncheon at all;
      and, as it was, Flora was obliged to whisk into the carriage with her last sandwich in her
      hand.
'I am the more sorry,' said he, after grumbling at the allotted ten minutes, 'as we shall
      dine so late. You desired Norman to bring any friend he liked, did you not, Flora!'
'Yes, and he spoke of bringing our old friend, Charles Cheviot, and Mr. Ogilvie,' said
      Flora.
'Mr. Ogilvie!' said Ethel, 'the Master of Glenbracken! Oh! I am so glad! I have wanted so
      much to see him!'
'Ah! he is a great hero of yours,' said Flora?
'Do you know him?' said Meta.
'No; but he is a great friend of Norman's, and a Scottish cousin —Norman Ogilvie. Norman has
      his name from the Ogilvies.'
'Our grandmother, Mrs. Mackenzie, was a daughter of Lord Glenbracken,' said Flora.
'This man might be called the Master of Glenbracken at home,' said Ethel. 'It is such a
      pretty title, and there is a beautiful history belonging to them. There was a Master of
      Glenbracken who carried James IV.'s standard at Flodden, and would not yield,
       and was killed with it wrapped round his body, and the Lion was dyed with his
      blood. Mamma knew some scraps of a ballad about him. Then they were out with Montrose, and had
      their castle burnt by the Covenanters, and since that they have been Jacobites, and one barely
      escaped being beheaded at Carlisle! I want to hear the rights of it! Norman is to go, some
      time or other, to stay at Glenbracken!'
'Yes,' said Flora, 'coming down to times present, this young heir seems worthy of his race.
      They are pattern people—have built a Church, and have all their tenantry in excellent order.
      This is the only son, and very good and clever—he preferred going to Balliol, that he might
      work; but he is a great sportsman, George,' added she; 'you will get on with him very well,
      about fishing, and grouse shooting, I dare say.'
Norman met them at the station, and there was great excitement at seeing his long nose under
      his College cap. He looked rather thin and worn, but brightened at the sight of the party.
      After the question—whether there had been any letters from Harry? he asked whether his father
      were coming?—and Ethel thought he seemed nervous at the idea of this addition to his audience.
      He saw them to their hotel, and, promising them his two guests, departed.
Ethel watched collegiate figures passing in the street, and recollected the grey buildings,
      just glimpsed at in her drive—it was dreamy and confused, and she stood musing, not
      discovering that it was time to dress, till Flora, and her Frenchwoman, came in, and laid
      violent hands on her.
The effect of their manipulations was very successful. Ethel was made to look well-dressed,
      and, still more, distinguished. Her height told well, when her lankiness was overcome, and her
      hair was disposed so as to set off her features to advantage. The glow of amusement and
      pleasure did still more for her; and Norman, who was in the parlour when the sisters appeared,
      quite started with surprise and satisfaction at her aspect.
'Well done, Flora!' he said. 'Why! I have been telling Ogilvie that one of my sisters was
      very plain!'
'Then, I hope we have been preparing an agreeable surprise for him,' said Flora. 'Ethel is
      very much obliged to you. By-the-by,' she said, in her universal amity, 'I must ask Harvey
      Anderson to dinner one of these days?'
Norman started—and his face said, 'Don't.'
'O, very well; it is as you please. I though it would please Stoneborough, and that Edward
      was a protégé of yours. What has
       he been doing? Did we not hear he had been distinguishing himself? Dr. Hoxton
      was boasting of his two scholars.'
'Ask him,' said Norman, hurriedly. 'At least,' said he, 'do not let anything from me prevent
      you.'
'Has he been doing anything wrong?' reiterated Flora.
'Not that I know of,' was the blunt answer; and, at the same instant, Mr. Ogilvie arrived.
      He was a pleasant, high-bred looking gentleman, brown-complexioned, and dark-eyed, with a
      brisk and resolute cast of countenance, that, Ethel thought, might have suited the Norman of
      Glenbracken, who died on the ruddy Lion of Scotland, and speaking with the very same slight
      degree of Scottish intonation as she remembered in her mother, making a most home-like sound
      in her ears.
Presently, the rest of their own party came down, and, soon after, Charles Cheviot appeared,
      looking as quiet, and tame, as he used to be in the school-boy days, when Norman would bring
      him home, and he used to be too shy to speak a word.
However, he had learnt the use of his tongue by this time, though it was a very soft one;
      and he stood by Ethel, asking many questions about Stoneborough, while something, apparently
      very spirited and amusing, was going on between the others.
The dinner went off well—there were few enough for the conversation to be general. The young
      men began to strike out sparks of wit against each other—Flora put in a word or two—Ethel grew
      so much interested in the discussion, that her face lighted up, and she joined in it, as if it
      had been only between her father and brother—keen, clear, and droll. After that, she had her
      full share in the conversation, and enjoyed it so much that, when she left the dinner-table,
      she fetched her writing-case, to sketch the colloquy, for Margaret and her father.
Flora exclaimed at her, for never allowing anyone to think of rest. Meta said she should
      like to do the same, but it was impossible now; she did not know how she should ever settle
      down to write a letter. Ethel was soon interrupted—the gentlemen entered, and Mr. Ogilvie came
      to the window, where she was sitting, and began to tell her how much obliged to her he and his
      College were, for having insisted on her brother's sending in his poem. 'Thanks are due, for
      our being spared an infliction, next week,' he said.
'Have you seen it?' she asked, and she was amused by the quick negative movement of his
      head.
'I read my friend's poems? But our lungs are prepared! Will you give me my cue—it is of no
      use to ask him when we are to deafen you. One generally knows the crack passages—something
       beginning with "O woman!" but it is well to be in readiness—if you would only
      forewarn me of the telling hits?'
'If they cannot tell themselves,' said Ethel, smiling, 'I don't think they deserve the
      name.'
'Perhaps you think what does tell on the undergraduates, collectively, is not always what
      ought to tell on them.'
'I don't know. I dare say the same would not be a favourite with them and with me.'
'I should like to know which are your favourites. No doubt you have a copy here—made by
      yourself—' and he looked towards her paper-case.
There was the copy, and she took it out, peering to see whether Norman were looking.
'Let me see,' he said, as she paused to open the MS., 'he told me the thoughts were more
      yours than his own.'
'Did he? That was not fair. One thought was an old one, long ago talked over between us; the
      rest is all his own.'
Here Mr. Ogilvie took the paper, and Ethel saw his countenance shew evident tokens of
      surprise and feeling.
'Yes,' he said, presently, 'May goes deep—deeper than most men—though I doubt whether they
      will applaud this.'
'I should like it better if they did not,' said Ethel. 'It is rather to be felt than shouted
      at.'
'And I don't know how the world would go on if it were felt. Few men would do much without
      the hope of fame,' said Norman Ogilvie.
'Is it the question what they would do?' said Ethel.
'So you call fame a low motive? I see where your brother's philosophy comes from.
'I do not call it a low motive—' Her pause was expressive.
'Nor allow that the Non omnis moriar of Horace has in it something divine?'
'For a heathen—yes.'
'And pray, what would you have the moving spring?'
'Duty.'
'Would not that end in, "Mine be a cot, beside the rill?"' said he, with an intonation of
      absurd sentiment.
'Well, and suppose an enemy came, would duty prompt not the Hay with the yoke—or Winkelried
      on the spears?'
'Nay, why not—"It is my duty to take care of Lucy."'
'Then Lucy ought to be broken on her own wheel.'
'Not at all! It is Lucy's duty to keep her Colin from running into danger.'
'I hope there are not many Lucies who would think so.'

'I agree with you. Most would rather have Colin killed than disgraced.'
'To be sure!' then, perceiving a knowing twinkle, as if he thought she had made an
      admission, she added, 'but what is disgrace?'
'Some say it is misfortune,' said Mr. Ogilvie.
'Is it not failure in duty?' said Ethel.
'Well!'
'Colin's first duty is to his king and country. If he fail in that, he is disgraced, in his
      own eyes, before Heaven, and men. If he does it, there is a reward, which seems to me a
      better, more powerful motive for Lucy to set before him than, "My dear, I hope you will
      distinguish yourself," when, the fact is, "England has forty thousand men,    We trust, as
      good as he." 
'"Victory or Westminster Abbey!" is a tolerable war cry,' said Mr. Ogilvie.
'Not so good as "England expects every man to do his duty." That serves for those who cannot
      look to Westminster Abbey.'
'Ah! you are an English woman!'
'Only by halves. I had rather have been the Master of Glenbracken at Flodden than King
      James, or—' for she grew rather ashamed of having been impelled to utter the personal
      allusion, 'better to have been the Swinton or the Gordon at Homildon, than all the rest put
      together.'
'I always thought Swinton a pig-headed old fellow, and I have little doubt that my ancestor
      was a young ruffian,' coolly answered the Master of Glenbracken.
'Why?' was all that Ethel could say in her indignation.
'It was the normal state of Scottish gentlemen,' he answered.
'If I thought you were in earnest, I should say you did not deserve to be a Scot.'
'And so you wish to make me out a fause Scot!'
'Ogilvie!' called Norman, 'are you fighting Scottish and English battles with Ethel there?
      We want you to tell us which will be the best day for going to Blenheim.'
The rest of the evening was spent in arranging the programme of their lionizing, in which it
      appeared that the Scottish cousin intended to take his full share. Ethel was not sorry, for he
      interested her much, while provoking her. She was obliged to put out her full strength in
      answering him, and felt, at the same time, that he was not making any effort in using the
      arguments that puzzled her —she was in earnest, while he was at play; and, though there was
      something teasing in this, and she knew it partook of what her
       brothers called chaffing, it gave her that sense of power on his side, which is
      always attractive to women. With the knowledge, that through Norman, she had of his real
      character, she understood that half, at least, of what he said, was jest; and the other half
      was enough in earnest to make it exciting to argue with him.
