
CHAPTER XVI.

Peace your tattlings. What is fair, William?
Poulcats! there are fairer things than poulcats sure!
I pray you have your remembrance, child, accusativo HING HANG HOG.
is Latin for bacon, I warrant you.Shakespeare.
In a large family it must often happen, that since every member of it cannot ride
      the same hobby, nor at the same time, their several steeds must sometimes run counter to each
      other; and so Ethel found it, one morning when Miss Winter, having a bad cold, had given her
      an unwonted holiday.
Mr. Wilmot had sent a large parcel of books for her to choose from for Cocksmoor, but this
      she could not well do without consultation. The multitude bewildered her, she was afraid of
      taking too many or too few, and the being brought to these practical details made her sensible
      that though her schemes were very grand and full for future doings, they passed very lightly
      over the intermediate ground. The ' Paulò post futurum ' was a period much more
      developed in her imagination than the future, that the present was flowing into.
Where was her coadjutor, Richard? Writing notes for papa, and not to be disturbed. She had
      better have waited tranquilly, but this would not suit her impatience, and she ran up to
      Margaret's room. There she found a great display of ivy leaves, which Norman, who had been
      turning half the shops in the town upside down in search of materials, was instructing her to
      imitate in leather work— a regular mania with him, and apparently the same with Margaret.
In came Ethel. 'Oh! Margaret, will you look at these "First Truths?" Do you think they would
      be easy enough? Shall I take some of the "Parables" and "Miracles" at once, or content myself
      with the book about "Jane Sparks?"'
'There's some very easy reading in "Jane Sparks," isn't there?
       I would not make the little books from the New Testament too common.'
'Take care, that leaf has five points,' said Norman.
'Shall I bring you up "Jane Sparks" to see? Because then you can judge,' said Ethel.
'There, Norman, is that right?—what a beauty! I should like to look over them by-and-by,
      dear Ethel, very much.'
Ethel gazed and went away, more put out than was usual with her. 'When Margaret has a new
      kind of fancy work,' she thought, 'she cares for nothing else! as if my poor children did not
      signify more than trumpery leather leaves!' She next met Flora.
'O Flora, see here, what a famous parcel of books Mr. Wilmot has sent us to choose from.'
'All those!' said Flora, turning them over as they lay heaped on the drawing-room sofa;
      'what a confusion!'
'See, such a parcel of reading books. I want to know what you think of setting them up with
      "Jane Sparks," as it is week-day teaching.'
'You will be very tired of hearing those spelt over for ever; they have some nicer books at
      the national school.'
'What is the name of them? Do you see any of them here?'
'No, I don't think I do, but I can't wait to look now. I must write some letters. You had
      better put them together a little. If you were to sort them, you would know what is there.
      Now, what a mess they are in.'
Ethel could not deny it, and began to deal them out in piles, looking somewhat more fitting,
      but still felt neglected and aggrieved, at no one being at leisure but Harry, who was not
      likely to be of any use to her.
Presently she heard the study door open, and hoped; but though it was Richard who entered
      the room, he was followed by Tom, and each held various books that boded little good to her.
      Miss Winter had, much to her own satisfaction, been relieved from the charge of Tom, whose
      lessons Richard had taken upon himself; and thus Ethel had heard so little about them for a
      long time past, that even in her vexation and desire to have them over, she listened with
      interest, desirous to judge what sort of place Tom might be likely to take in school.
She did not perceive that this made Richard nervous and uneasy. He had a great dislike to
      spectators of Latin lessons; he never had forgotten an unlucky occasion, some years back, when
      his father was examining him in the Georgics, and he, dull by nature, and duller by confusion
      and timidity, had gone on rendering word for word— enim for, seges a crop,
       lini of mud, urit burns, campum the field,
      
avenæ a crop of pipe, urit burns it, when Norman and Ethel had first warned
      him of the beauty of his translation by an explosion of laughing, when his father had shut the
      book with a bounce, shaken his head in utter despair, and told him to give up all thoughts of
      doing anything—and when Margaret had cried with vexation. Since that time, he had never been
      happy when anyone was in earshot of a lesson; but to-day he had no escape—Harry lay on the rug
      reading, and Ethel sat forlorn over her books on the sofa. Tom, however, was bright enough,
      declined his Greek nouns irreproachably, and construed his Latin so well, that Ethel could not
      help putting in a word or two of commendation, and auguring the third form. 'Do let him off
      the parsing, Ritchie,' said she, coaxingly—'he has said it so well, and I want you so
      much.'
'I am afraid I must not,' said Richard; who, to her surprise, did not look pleased or
      satisfied with the prosperous translation; 'but come, Tom, you shan't have many words, if you
      really know them.'
Tom twisted and looked rather cross, but when asked to parse the word viribus ,
      answered readily and correctly.
'Very well, only two more— affuit? '
'Third person singular, præter perfect tense of the verb affo, affis, affui, affere
      ,' gabbled off Tom with such confidence, that though Ethel gave an indignant jump, Richard was
      almost startled into letting it pass, and disbelieving himself. He remonstrated in a somewhat
      hesitating voice. 'Did you find that in the dictionary,' said he, 'I thought affui
      came from adsum .'
'O to be sure, stupid fool of a word, so it does!' said Tom, hastily. 'I had forgot—
       adsum, ades, affui, adesse .'
Richard said no more, but proposed the word oppositus.
'Adjective.'
Ethel was surprised, for she remembered that it was, in this passage, part of a passive
      verb, which Tom had construed correctly, 'it was objected,' and she had thought this very
      creditable to him, whereas he now evidently took it for opposite; however, on
      Richard's reading the line, he corrected himself and called it a participle, but did not
      commit himself further, till asked for its derivation.
'From oppositor .'
'Hallo!' cried Harry, who hitherto had been abstracted in his book, but now turned, raised
      himself on his elbow, and, at the blunder, shook his thick yellow locks, and showed his teeth
      like a young lion.
'No, now, Tom, pay attention,' said Richard, resignedly. 'If you found out its meaning, you
      must have seen its derivation.'

'Oppositus ,' said Tom, twisting his fingers, and gazing first at Ethel, then at
      Harry, in hopes of being prompted, then at the ceiling and floor, the while he drawled out the
      word with a whine, 'why, oppositus from op-posor .'
'A poser! aint it?' said Harry.
'Don't Harry, you distract him,' said Richard. 'Come, Tom, say at once whether you know it
      or not—it is of no use to invent.'
'From op —' and a mumble.
'What? I don't hear— op —'
Tom again looked for help to Harry, who made a mischevious movement of his lips, as if
      prompting, and, deceived by it, he said boldly, 'From op-possum .'
'That's right! let us hear him decline it!' cried Harry, in an ecstasy, ' Oppossum,
       opottis, opposse , or oh-pottery! '
'Harry,' said Richard, in a gentle reasonable voice, 'I wish you would be so kind as not to
      stay, if you cannot help distracting him.'
And Harry, who really had a tolerable share of forbearance and consideration, actually
      obeyed, contenting himself with tossing his book into the air and catching it again, while he
      paused at the door to give his last unsolicited assistance. 'Decline oppossum , you
      say. I'll tell you how: O-possum re-poses up a gum tree. O-pot-you-I will,
      says the O-posse of Yankees, come out to ketch him. Opossum poses them and
      declines in O-pot-esse by any manner of means of o-potting-di-do-dum , was
      quite oppositum-oppositu , in fact, quite contrairy .'
Richard, with the gravity of a victim, heard this sally of schoolboy wit, which threw Ethel
      back on the sofa in fits of laughing, and declaring that the Opossum declined, not that he was
      declined; but, in the midst of the disturbance thus created, Tom stepped up to her, and
      whispered, 'Do tell me, Ethel.'
'Indeed I shan't,' said she. 'Why don't you say fairly if you don't know?'
He was obliged to confess his ignorance, and Richard made him conjugate the whole verb
       opponor from beginning to end, in which he wanted a good deal of help.
Ethel could not help saying, 'How did you find out the meaning of that word, Tom, if you
      didn't look out the verb?'
'I—don't know,' drawled Tom, in the voice, half sullen, half piteous, which he always
      assumed when out of sorts.
'It is very odd,' she said, decidedly; but Richard took no notice, and proceeded to the
      other lessons, which went off tolerably well, except the arithmetic, where there was some
      great misunderstanding, into which Ethel did not enter for some time. When she did attend, she
      perceived that Tom had brought a right answer, without understanding
       the working of the sum, and that Richard was putting him through it. She began
      to be worked into a state of dismay and indignation at Tom's behaviour, and Richard's calm
      indifference, which made her almost forget Jane Sparks, and long to be alone with Richard; but
      all the world kept coming into the room, and going out, and she could not say what was in her
      mind till after dinner, when, seeing Richard go up into Margaret's room, she ran after him,
      and entering it, surprised Margaret, by not beginning on her books, but saying at once,
      'Ritchie, I wanted to speak to you about Tom. I am sure he shuffled about those lessons.'
'I am afraid he does,' said Richard, much concerned.
'What, do you mean that it is often so?'
'Much too often,' said Richard; 'but I have never been able to detect him; he is very sharp,
      and has some underhand way of preparing his lessons that I cannot make out.'
'Did you know it, Margaret?' said Ethel, astonished not to see her sister looked shocked as
      well as sorry.
'Yes,' said Margaret, 'Ritchie and I have often talked it over, and tried to think what was
      to be done.'
'Dear me! why don't you tell papa? It is such a terrible thing!'
'So it is,' said Margaret, 'but we have nothing positive or tangible to accuse Tom of; we
      don't know what he does, and have never caught him out.'
'I am sure he must have found out the meaning of that oppositum in some wrong
      way—if he had looked it out, he would only have found opposite. Nothing but opponor
      could have shown him the rendering which he made.'
'That's like what I have said almost every day,' said Richard, 'but there we are—I can't get
      any further.'
'Perhaps he guesses by the context,' said Margaret.
'It would be impossible to do so always,' said both the Latin scholars at once.
'Well, I can't think how you can take it so quietly,' said Ethel. 'I would have told papa
      the first moment, and put a stop to it. I have a great mind to do so, if you won't.
'Ethel, Ethel, that would never do!' exclaimed Margaret, 'pray don't. Papa would be so
      dreadfully grieved and angry with poor Tom.'
'Well, so he deserves,' said Ethel.
'You don't know what it is to see papa angry,' said Richard.
'Dear me, Richard!' cried Ethel, who thought she knew pretty well what his sharp words were.
      'I'm sure papa never was angry with me, without making me love him more, and, at least,
       want to be better.'

'You are a girl,' said Richard.
'You are higher spirited, and shake off things faster,' said Margaret.
'Why, what do you think he would do to Tom?'
'I think he would be so very angry, that Tom, who, you know, is timid and meek, would be
      dreadfully frightened,' said Richard.
'That's just what he ought to be, frightened out of these tricks.'
'I am afraid it would frighten him into them still more,' said Richard, 'and perhaps give
      him such a dread of my father as would prevent him from ever being open with him.'
'Besides, it would make papa so very unhappy,' added Margaret. 'Of course, if poor dear Tom
      had been found out in any positive deceit, we ought to mention it at once, and let him be
      punished; but while it is all vague suspicion, and of what papa has such a horror of, it would
      only grieve him, and make him constantly anxious, without, perhaps, doing Tom any good.'
'I think all that is expediency,' said Ethel, in her bluff, abrupt way.
'Besides,' said Richard, 'we have nothing positive to accuse him of, and if we had, it would
      be of no use. He will be at school in three weeks, and there he would be sure to shirk, even
      if he left it off here. Everyone does, and thinks nothing of it.'
'Richard!' cried both sisters, shocked. 'You never did?'
'No, we didn't, but most others do, and not bad fellows either. It is not the way of boys to
      think much of those things.'
'It is mean—it is dishonourable—it is deceitful!' cried Ethel.
'I know it is very wrong, but you'll never get the general run of boys to think so,' said
      Richard.
'Then Tom ought not to go to school at all till he is well armed against it,' said
      Ethel.
That can't be helped,' said Richard. 'He will get clear of it in time, when he knows
      better.'
'I will talk to him,' said Margaret, 'and, indeed, I think it would be better than worrying
      papa.'
'Well,' said Ethel, 'of course I shan't tell, because it is not my business, but I think
      papa ought to know everything about us, and I don't like your keeping anything back. It is
      being almost as bad as Tom himself.'
With which words, as Flora entered, Ethel marched out of the room in displeasure, and went
      down, resolved to settle Jane Sparks by herself.
'Ethel is out of sorts to-day,' said Flora. 'What's the matter?'
'We have had a discussion,' said Margaret. 'She has been
       terribly shocked by finding out what we have often thought about poor little
      Tom, and she thinks we ought to tell papa. Her principle is quite right, but I doubt—'
'I know exactly how Ethel would do it!' cried Flora; 'blurt out all on a sudden, "Papa, Tom
      cheats at his lessons!" then there would be a tremendous uproar, papa would scold Tom till he
      almost frightened him out of his wits, and then find out it was only suspicion.
'And never have any comfort again,' said Margaret. 'He would always dread that Tom was
      deceiving him, and then think it was all for want of—O no, it will never do to speak of it,
      unless we find out some positive piece of misbehaviour.'
'Certainly,' said Flora.
'And it would do Tom no good to make him afraid of papa,' said Richard.
'Ethel's rule is right in principle,' said Margaret, thoughtfully, that papa ought to know
      all without reserve, and yet it will hardly do in practice. One must use discretion, and not
      tease him about every little thing. He takes them so much to heart, that he would be almost
      distracted; and, with so much business abroad, I think, at home he should have nothing but
      rest, and, as far as we can, freedom from care and worry. Anything wrong about the children
      brings on the grief so much, that I cannot bear to mention it.'
Richard and Flora agreed with her, admiring the spirit which made her, in her weakness and
      helplessness, bear the whole burthen of family cares alone, and devote herself entirely to
      spare her father. He was, indeed, her first object, and she would have sacrificed anything to
      give him ease of mind; but, perhaps, she regarded him more as a charge of her own, than as, in
      very truth, the head of the family. She had the government in her hands, and had never been
      used to see him exercise it much in detail (she did not know how much her mother had referred
      to him in private), and had succeeded to her authority at a time when his health and spirits
      were in such a state as to make it doubly needful to spare him. It was no wonder that she
      sometimes carried her consideration beyond what was strictly right, and forgot that he was the
      real authority, more especially as his impulsive nature sometimes carried him away, and his
      sound judgment was not certain to come into play at the first moment, so that it required some
      moral courage to excite displeasure, so easy of manifestation; and of such courage there was,
      perhaps, a deficiency in her character. Nor had she yet detected her own satisfaction in being
      the first with everyone in the family.
Ethel was put out, as Flora had discovered, and when she was down stairs she found it out,
      and accused herself of having been
       cross to Margaret, and unkind to Tom—of wishing to be a tell-tale. But still,
      though displeased with herself, she was dissatisfied with Margaret; it might be right, but it
      did not agree with her notions. She wanted to see everyone uncompromising, as girls of fifteen
      generally do; she had an intense disgust and loathing of underhand ways, could not bear to
      think of Tom's carrying them on, and going to a place of temptation with them uncorrected; and
      she looked up to her father with the reverence and enthusiasm of one like minded.
She was vexed on another score. Norman came home from Abbotstoke Grange without having seen
      Miss Rivers, but with a fresh basket of choice flowers, rapturous descriptions of Mr. River's
      prints, and a present of an engraving, in shading, such as to give the effect of a cast, of a
      very fine head of Alexander. Nothing was to be thought of but a frame for this—olive, bay,
      laurel, everything appropriate to the conqueror. Margaret and Norman were engrossed in the
      subject, and, to Ethel, who had no toleration for fancy work, who expected everything to be
      either useful or intellectual, this seemed very frivolous. She heard her father say how glad
      he was to see Norman interested and occupied, and certainly, though it was only in leather
      leaves, it was better than drooping and attending to nothing. She knew, too, that Margaret did
      it for his sake, but, said Ethel to herself, 'It was very odd that people should find
      amusement in such things. Margaret always had a turn for them, but it was very strange in
      Norman.'
Then came the pang of finding out that this was aggravated by the neglect of herself; she
      called it all selfishness, and felt that she had had an uncomfortable, unsatisfactory day,
      with everything going wrong.
