
CHAPTER XVIII.
Margaret had borne the meeting much too well for her own good, and a wakeful night
      of palpitation was the consequence; but she would not allow anyone to take it to heart, and
      declared that she should be ready to enjoy Harry by the time he should return, and meantime,
      she should dwell on the delight of his meeting Flora.
No one had rested too soundly that night, and Dr. May had not been able to help looking in
      at his sleeping boy at five in the morning, to certify himself that he had not only figured
      his present bliss to himself, in his ten minutes' dream. And looking in again at half-past
      seven, he found Harry half-dressed, with his arm round Mary; laughing, almost sobbing, over
      the treasures in his cupboard, which he had newly discovered in their fresh order.
Dr. May looked like a new man that morning, with his brightened eye and bearing, as if there
      were a well-spring of joy within him, ready to brim over at once in tear and in smile, and
      finding an outlet in the praise and thanksgiving that his spirit chanted, and his
       face expressed, and in that sunny genial benevolence that must make all share
      his joy.
He was going to run over half the town—everyone would like to hear it from him; Ethel and
      Mary must go to the rest—the old women in the almshouses, where lived an old cook who used to
      be fond of Harry—they should have a feast—all who were well enough in the hospital should have
      a tea-drinking—Dr. Hoxton had already granted a holiday to the school; every boy with whom
      they had any connection should come to dinner, and Edward Anderson should be asked to meet
      Harry on his return, because, poor fellow, he was so improved.
Dr. May was in a such a transport of kind-hearted schemes, that he was not easily made to
      hear that Harry had not a sixpence wherewith to reach London.
Ethel, meanwhile, was standing beside her brother tendering to him some gold, as his last
      quarter.
'How did you get it Ethel? do you keep the purse?'
'No, but papa took Cocksmoor in your stead, when—'
'Nonsense, Ethel,' said Harry; 'I don't want it. Have I not all my pay and allowance for the
      whole time I was dead? And as to robbing Cocksmoor—'
'Yes, keep it, Ethel,' said her father, 'do you think I would take it now , when if
      there were a thankoffering in the world!—And, by-the-by, your Cocksmoor children must have
      something to remember this by—'
Everyone could have envied Norman, for travelling to London with Harry, but that he must
      proceed to Oxford in two days, when Harry would return to them. The station-master, thinking
      he could not do enough for the returned mariner, put the two brothers into the coupé
      , as if they had been a bridal couple, and they were very glad of the privacy, having, as yet,
      hardly spoken to each other, when Harry's attention was dispersed among so many.
Norman asked many questions about the mission work in the southern hemisphere, and ended by
      telling his brother of his design, which met with Harry's hearty approbation.
'That's right, old June. There's nothing they want so much, as such as you. How glad my aunt
      will be! Perhaps you will see David! Oh! if you were to go out to the Loyalty group!'
'Very possibly I might,' said Norman.
'Tell them you are my brother, and how they will receive you. I can see the mop-heads they
      will dress in honour of you, and what a feast of pork and yams you will have to eat! But there
      is plenty of work among the Maoris for you—they want a Clergyman terribly
       at the next village to my uncle's place. I say, Norman, it will go hard if I
      don't get a ship bound for the Pacific, and come and see you.'
'I shall reckon on you. That is, if I have not to stay to help my father.'
'To be sure,' exclaimed Harry; 'I thought you would have staid at home, and married little
      Miss Rivers!'
Thus broadly and boyishly did he plunge into that most tender subject, making his brother
      start and wince, as if he had touched a wound.
'Nonsense!' he cried, almost angrily.
'Well! you used to seem very much smitten, but so, to be sure, were some of the Alcestes
      with the young ladies at Valparaiso. How we used to roast Owen about that Spanish Donna, and
      he was as bad at Sydney about the young lady, whose father, we told him, was a convict, though
      he kept such a swell carriage. He had no peace about his father-in-law, the house-breaker!
      Don't I remember how you pinched her hand the night you were righted!'
'You know nothing about it,' said Norman, shortly. 'She is far beyond my reach.'
'A fine lady? Ha? Well, I should have thought you as good as Flora, any day,' said Harry,
      indignantly.
'She is what she always was,' said Norman, anxious to silence him; 'but it is unreasonable
      to think of it. She is all but engaged to Sir Henry Walkinghame.'
'Walkinghame!' cried the volatile sailor. 'I have half a mind to send in my name to Flora as
      Miss Walkinghame!' and he laughed heartily over that adventure, ending, however, with a sigh,
      as he said, 'It had nearly cost me a great deal! But tell me, Norman, how has that Meta, as
      they called her, turned out? I never saw anything prettier or nicer than she was that day of
      the Roman encampment, and I should be sorry if that fine fashionable aunt of hers, had made
      her stuck-up and disdainful.'
'No such thing,' said Norman.
Ha! said Harry to himself, I see how it is! She has gone and made poor old June unhappy,
      with her scornful airs—a little impertinent puss!—I wonder Flora does not teach her better
      manners.
Norman, meanwhile, as the train sped over roofs, and among chimneys, was reproaching himself
      for running into the fascination of her presence, and then recollecting that her situation, as
      well as his destiny, both guaranteed that they could meet only as friendly connections.
No carriage awaited them at the station, which surprised Norman,
       till he recollected that the horses had probably been out all day, and it was
      eight o'clock. Going to Park Lane in a cab, the brothers were further surprised to find
      themselves evidently not expected. The butler came to speak to them, saying that Mr. and Mrs.
      Rivers were gone out to dinner, but would return, probably, at about eleven o'clock. He
      conducted them up-stairs, Harry following his brother, in towering vexation and
      disappointment, trying to make him turn to hear that they would go directly—home—to
      Eton—anywhere— why would he go in at all?
The door was opened, Mr. May was announced, and they were in a silk-lined boudoir ,
      where a little slender figure in black started up, and came forward with outstretched
      hand.
'Norman!' she cried, 'How are you? Are you come on your way to Oxford?'
'Has not Flora had Mary's letter?'
'Yes, she said she had one. She was keeping it till she had time to read it.'
As she spoke, Meta had given her hand to Harry, as it was evidently expected; she raised her
      eyes to his face, and said, smiling, and blushing, 'I am sure I ought to know you, but I am
      afraid I don't.'
'Look again,' said Norman. 'See if you have ever seen him before.'
Laughing, glancing, and casting down her eyes, she raised them with a sudden start of joy,
      but colouring more deeply, said, 'Indeed, I cannot remember. I dare say I ought.'
'I think you see a likeness,' said Norman.
'O yes, I see,' she answered, faltering; but perceiving how bright were the looks of both,
      'No? Impossible! Yes it is!'
'Yes, it is,' said both brothers with one voice.
She clasped her hands, and absolutely bounded with transport, then grasped both Harry's
      hands, and then Norman's, her whole countenance radiant with joy and sympathy beyond
      expression.
'Dear, dear Dr. May!' was her first exclamation. 'Oh! how happy you must all be! And
      Margaret?' She looked up at Norman, and came nearer. 'Is not Mr. Ernescliffe come?' she asked
      softly, and trembling.
'No,' was the low answer, which Harry could not bear to hear, and therefore walked to the
      window. 'No, Meta, but Margaret is much comforted about him. He died in great peace—in his
      arms—' as he signed towards his brother. And as Harry continued to gaze out on the stars of
      gas on the opposite side of the park, he was able to add a few of the particulars.
Meta's eyes glistened with tears, as she said, 'Perhaps it would have been too perfect if he
      had come; but oh, Norman! how good
       she is to bear it so patiently! And how gloriously he behaved! How can we make
      enough of him! And Flora out! how sorry she will be!'
'And she never opened Mary's letter,' said Harry, coming back to them.
'She little thought what it contained,' said Meta. 'Mary's letters are apt to bear keeping,
      you know, and she was so busy, that she laid it aside for a treat after the day's work. But
      there! inhospitable wretch that I am! you have had no dinner!'
A refection of tea and cold meat was preferred, and in her own pretty manner, Meta lavished
      her welcomes, trying to cover any pain given by Flora's neglect.
'What makes her so busy?' asked Harry, looking round on the beautifully furnished apartment,
      which, to many eyes besides those fresh from a Milanesian hut, might have seemed a paradise of
      luxurious ease.
'You don't know what an important lady you have for a sister,' said Meta, merrily.
'But tell me, what can she have to do? I thought you London ladies had nothing to do, but to
      sit with your hands before you entertaining company.'
Meta laughed heartily. 'Shall I begin at the beginning? I'll describe to-day then, and you
      must understand that this is what Tom would call a mild specimen—only one evening engagement.
      Though, perhaps, I ought to start from last night at twelve o'clock, when she was at the
      Austrian Ambassador's ball, and came home at two, but she was up by eight—she always manages
      to get through her housekeeping matters before breakfast. At nine, breakfast, and
      baby—by-the-by, you have never inquired for our niece.'
'I have not come to believe in her yet,' said Harry.
'Seeing is believing,' said Meta; 'but no, I won't take an unfair advantage over her
      mamma—and she will be fast asleep—I never knew a child sleep as she does. So to go on with our
      day. The papers come, and Miss Leonora is given over to me; for you must know we are wonderful
      politicians. Flora studies all the debates till George finds out what he has heard in the
      House, and baby and I profit. Baby goes out walking, and the post comes. Flora always goes to
      the study with George, and writes, and does all sorts of things for him. She is the most
      useful wife in the world. At twelve, we had our singing lesson—'
'Singing lesson!' exclaimed Harry.
'Yes, you know she has a pretty voice, and she is glad to cultivate it. It is very useful at
      parties, but it takes up a great deal of time, and with all I can do to save her in note
      writing, the morning is
       gone directly. After luncheon, she had to ride with George, and came back in a
      hurry to make some canvassing calls about the orphan asylum, and Miss Bracy's sister. If we
      get her in at all, it will be Flora's diplomacy. And there was shopping to do, and when we
      came in hoping for time for our letters, there were the Walkinghames, who staid a long time,
      so that Flora could only despatch the most important notes, before George came in and wanted
      her. She was reading something for him all the time she was dressing, but, as I say, this is
      quite a quiet day.'
'Stop!' cried Harry, with a gesture of oppression, 'it sounds harder than cleaning knives,
      like aunt Flora! And what is an unquiet day like?'
'You will see, for we have a great evening party to-morrow.'
'Do you always stay at home?' asked Harry.
'Not always, but I do not go to large parties or balls this year,' said Meta, glancing at
      her deep mourning,—'I am very glad of a little time at home.'
'So you don't like it.'
'Oh yes! it is very pleasant,' said Meta. 'It is so entertaining when we talk it over
      afterwards, and I like to hear how Flora is admired, and called the beauty of the season. I
      tell George, and we do so gloat over it together! There was an old French Marquis the other
      night, a dear old man, quite of the ancien régime , who said she was exactly like the
      portraits of Madame de Maintenon, and produced a beautiful miniature on a snuff-box,
      positively like that very pretty form of face of hers. The old man even declared that Mistress
      Rivers was worthy to be a Frenchwoman.'
'I should like to kick him!' amiably responded Harry.
'I hope you won't to-morrow! But don't let us waste our time over this; I want so much to
      hear about New Zealand.'
Meta was well read in Australasian literature, and drew out a great deal more information
      from Harry, than Norman had yet heard. She made him talk about the Maori pah near his uncle's
      farm, where the Sunday Services were conducted by an old gentleman tattooed elegantly in the
      face, but dressed like an English Clergyman; and tell of his aunt's troubles about the younger
      generation, whom their elders, though Christians themselves, could not educate, and who she
      feared would relapse into heathenism, for want of instruction, though with excellent
      dispositions.
'How glad you must be that you are likely to go!' exclaimed Meta to Norman, who had sat
      silently listening.
The sound of the door bell was the first intimation that Harry's histories had occupied them
      until long past twelve o'clock.
'Now then!' cried Meta, springing forward as if intending to
       meet Flora with the tidings, but checking herself, as if she ought not to be the
      first. There was a pause. Flora was hearing downstairs that Mr. Norman May and another
      gentleman had arrived, and, while vexed at her own omission, and annoyed at Norman's bringing
      friends without waiting for permission, she was yet prepared to be courteous and amiable. She
      entered, in her rich black watered silk, deeply trimmed with lace, and with silver ornaments
      in her dark hair, so graceful and distinguished looking, that Harry stood suspended,
      hesitating, for an instant, whether he beheld his own sister, especially as she made a
      dignified inclination towards him, offering her hand to Norman, as she said 'Meta has told
      you—' but there she broke off, exclaiming, 'Ha! is it possible! No, surely it cannot be—'
'Miss Walkinghame?' said the sailor, who had felt at home with her at the first word, and
      she flew into his great rough arms.
'Harry! this is dear Harry! our own dear sailor come back,' cried she, as her husband stood
      astonished; and, springing towards him, she put Harry's hand into his, 'My brother Harry! our
      dear lost one.'
'Your—brother—Harry,' slowly pronounced George, as he instinctively gave the grasp of
      greeting—'your brother that was lost? Upon my word,' as the matter dawned fully on him, and he
      became eager, 'I am very glad to see you. I never was more rejoiced in my life.'
'When did you come? Have you been at home?' asked Flora.
'I came home yesterday—Mary wrote to tell you.'
'Poor dear old Mary! There's a lesson against taking a letter on trust. I thought it would
      be all Cocksmoor, and would wait for a quiet moment! How good to come to me so soon, you dear
      old shipwrecked mariner.'
'I was forced to come to report myself,' said Harry, 'or I could not have come away from my
      father so soon.'
The usual questions and their sad answers ensued, and while Flora talked to Harry, fondly
      holding his hand, Norman and Meta explained the history to George, who no sooner comprehended
      it, than he opined it must have been a horrid nuisance, and that Harry was a gallant fellow;
      then striking him over the shoulder, welcomed him home with all his kind heart, told him he
      was proud to receive him, and falling into a state of rapturous hospitality, rang the bell,
      and wanted to order all sorts of eatables and drinkables, but was sadly baffled to find him
      already satisfied.
There was more open joy than even at home, and Flora was supremely happy as she sat between
      her brothers, listening and enquiring till far past one o'clock, when she perceived poor
      George
       dozing off, awakened every now and then by a great nod, and casting a wishful
      glance of resigned remonstrance, as if to appeal against sitting up all night.
The meeting at breakfast was a renewal of pleasure. Flora was proud and happy in shewing off
      her little girl, a model baby, as she called her, a perfect doll for quietness, so that she
      could be brought in at Family Prayers; 'and,' said Flora, 'I am the more glad that she keeps
      no one away, because we can only have Evening Prayers on Sunday. It is a serious thing to
      arrange for such a household.'
'She is equal to anything,' said George.
The long file of servants marched in, George read sonorously, and Flora rose from her knees,
      highly satisfied at the impression produced upon her brothers.
'I like to have the baby with us at breakfast,' she said; 'it is the only time of day when
      we can be sure of seeing anything of her, and I like her nurse to have some respite. Do you
      think her grown, Norman?'
'Not very much,' said Norman, who thought her more inanimate and like a pretty little waxen
      toy, than when he had last seen her. 'Is she not rather pale?'
'London makes children pale. I shall soon take her home to acquire a little colour. You must
      know Sir Henry has bitten us with his yachting tastes, and as soon as we can leave London, we
      are going to spend six weeks with the Walkinghames at Ryde, and rival you, Harry. I think Miss
      Leonora will be better at home, so we must leave her there. Lodgings and irregularities don't
      suit people of her age.'
'Does home mean Stoneborough?' asked Norman.
'No. Old nurse has one of her deadly prejudices against Preston, and I would not be
      responsible for the consequences of shutting them up in the same nursery. Margaret would be
      distracted between them. No, miss, you shall make her a visit every day, and be fondled by
      your grandpapa.'
George began a conversation with Harry on nautical matters, and Norman tried to discover how
      Meta liked the yachting project, and found her prepared to think it charming. Hopes were
      expressed that Harry might be at Portsmouth, and a quantity of gay scheming ensued, with
      reiterations of the name of Walkinghame, while Norman had a sense of being wrapped in some
      grey mist, excluding him from participation in their enjoyments, and condemned his own temper,
      as frivolous, for being thus excited to discontent.
Presently, he heard George insisting that he and Harry should return in time for the evening
      party; and, on beginning to refuse,
       was amazed to find Harry's only objection was on the score of lack of
      uniform.
'I don't want you in one, sir,' said Flora.
'I have only one coat in the world, besides this,' continued Harry, 'and that is all over
      tar.'
'George will see to that,' said Flora. 'Don't you think you would be welcome in matting,
      with an orange cowry round your neck?'
Norman, however, took a private opportunity of asking Harry if he was aware of what he was
      undertaking, and what kind of people they should meet.
'All English people behave much the same in a room,' said Harry, as if all society, provided
      it was not cannibal, were alike to him.
'I should have thought you would prefer finding out Forder in his chambers, or going to one
      of the theatres.'
'As you please,' said Harry; 'but Flora seems to want us, and I should rather like to see
      what sort of company she keeps.'
Since Harry was impervious to shyness, Norman submitted, and George took them to a
      wonderworker in cloth, who undertook that full equipments should await the young gentleman.
      Harry next despatched his business at the Admiralty, and was made very happy by tidings of his
      friend Owen's safe arrival in America.
Thence the brothers went to Eton, where home letters had been more regarded; and Dr. May
      having written to secure a holiday for the objects of their visit, they were met at the
      station by the two boys. Hector's red face and prominent light eyebrows were instantly
      recognised; but, as to Tom, Harry could hardly believe that the little, dusty, round-backed
      grub he had left, had been transformed into the well-made gentlemanlike lad before him,
      peculiarly trim and accurate in dress, even to the extent of as much foppery as Eton taste
      permitted.
Ten minutes had not passed before Tom, taking a survey of the new comer, began to exclaim at
      Norman, for letting him go about such a figure; and, before they knew what was doing, they had
      all been conducted into the shop of the 'only living man who knew how to cut hair.' Laughing
      and good-natured, Harry believed his hair was 'rather long,' allowed himself to be seated, and
      to be divested of a huge superfluous mass of sun-dried curls, which Tom, particularly
      resenting that 'rather long,' kept on taking up, and unrolling from their tight rings, to
      measure the number of inches.
'That is better,' said he, as they issued from the shop; 'but, as to that coat of yours, the
      rogue who made it should never make another. Where could you have picked it up?'

'At a shop at Auckland,' said Harry, much amused.
'Kept by a savage?' said Tom, to whom it was no laughing matter. 'See that seam!'
'Have done, May!' exclaimed Hector. 'He will think you a tailor's apprentice!'
'Or worse,' said Norman. 'River's tailor kept all strictures to himself.'
Tom muttered that he only wanted Harry to be fit to be seen by the fellows.
'The fellows are not such asses as you!' cried Hector. 'You don't deserve that he should
      come to see you. If my—'
There poor Hector broke off. If his own only brother had been walking beside him, how would
      he not have felt? They had reached their tutor's house, and, opening his own door, he made an
      imploring sign to Harry to enter with him. On the table lay a letter from Margaret, and
      another which Harry had written to him from Auckland.
'Oh, Harry, you were with him,' he said; 'tell me all about him.'
And he established himself, with his face hidden on the table, uttering nothing, except, 'Go
      on,' whenever Harry's voice failed in the narration. When something was said of 'all for the
      best,' he burst out, 'He might say so. I suppose one ought to think so. But is not it hard,
      when I had nobody but him? And there was Maplewood; and I might have been so happy there, with
      him and Margaret.'
'They say nothing could have made Margaret well,' said Harry.
'I don't care; he would have married her all the same, and we should have made her so happy
      at Maplewood. I hate the place! I wish it were at Jericho!'
'You are captain of the ship now,' said Harry, 'and you must make the best of it.'
'I can't. It will never be home. Home is with Margaret, and the rest of them.'
'So Alan said he hoped you would make it; and you are just like one of us, you know.'
'What's the use of that, when Captain Gordon will not let me go near you. Taking me to that
      abominable Maplewood last Easter, with half the house shut up, and all horrid! And he is as
      dry as a stick!'
'The Captain!' cried Harry, angrily. 'There's not a better Captain to sail with in the whole
      navy, and your brother would be the first to tell you so! I'm not discharged yet, Hector—you
      had better look out what you say!'
'May be, he is the best to sail with, but that is not being the
       best to live with,' said the heir of Maplewood, disconsolately. 'Alan himself
      always said he never knew what home was, till he got to your father and Margaret.'
'So will you,' said Harry; 'why, my father is your master, or whatever you may call it.'
'No, Captain Gordon is my guardian.'
'Eh! what's become of the will then?'
'What will?' cried Hector. 'Did Alan make one after all?'
'Aye. At Valparaiso, he had a touch of fever; I went ashore to nurse him, to a merchant's,
      who took us in for love of our Scottish blood. Mr. Ernescliffe made a will there, and left it
      in his charge.'
'Do you think he made Dr. May my guardian?'
'He asked me whether I thought he would dislike it, and I told him, no.'
'That's right!' cried Hector. 'That's like dear old Alan! I shall get back to the Doctor and
      Margaret after all. Mind you write to the Captain, Harry!'
Hector was quite inspirited and ready to return to the others, but Harry paused to express a
      hope that he did not let Tom make such a fool of himself as he had done to-day.
'Not he,' said Hector. 'He is liked as much as anyone in the house—he has been five times
      sent up for good. See there in the Eton list! He is a real clever fellow.'
'Aye, but what's the good of all that, if you let him be a puppy?'
'Oh, he'll be cured. A fellow that has been a sloven always is a puppy for a bit,' said
      Hector, philosophically.
Norman was meantime taking Tom to task for these same airs, and, hearing it was from the
      desire to see his brother respectable— Stoneborough men never cared for what they looked like,
      and he must have Harry do himself credit.
'You need not fear,' said Norman. 'He did not require Eton to make him a gentleman. How now?
      Why Tom, old man, you are not taking that to heart? That's all over long ago.'
For that black spot in his life had never passed out of the lad's memory, and it might be
      from the lurking want of self-respect that there was about him so much of self-assertion, in
      attention to trifles. He was very reserved, and no one except Norman had ever found the way to
      anything like confidence, and Norman had vexed him by the proposal he had made in the
      holidays.
He made no answer, but stood looking at Norman with an odd undecided gaze.
'Well, what now, old fellow?' said Norman, half fearing ' that ' might not be
      absolutely over. 'One would think you were not glad to see Harry.'

'I suppose he has made you all the more set upon that mad notion of yours,' said Tom.
'So far as making me feel that that part of the world has a strong claim on us,'
      replied Norman.
'I'm sure you don't look as if you found your pleasure in it,' cried Tom.
'Pleasure is not what I seek,' said Norman.
'What is the matter with you?' said Tom. 'You said I did not seem rejoiced—you look worse, I
      am sure.' Tom put his arm on Norman's shoulder, and looked solicitously at him—demonstrations
      of affection very rare with him.
'I wonder which would really make you happiest, to have your own way, and go to these black
      villains?—'
'Remember, that but for others who have done so, Harry—'
'Pshaw,' said Tom, rubbing some invisible dust from his coat sleeve. 'If it would keep you
      at home, I would say I never would hear of doctoring.'
'I thought you had said so.'
'What's the use of my coming here, if I'm to be a country doctor?'
'I have told you I do not mean to victimize you. If you have a distaste to it, there's an
      end of it—I am quite ready.'
Tom gave a great sigh. 'No,' he said, 'if I must, I must; I don't mind the part of it that
      you do. I only hate the name of it, and the being tied down to a country place like that,
      while you go out thousands of miles off to these savages; but if it is the only thing to
      content you, I wont stand in your way. I can't bear your looking disconsolate.'
'Don't think yourself bound, if you really dislike the profession.'
'I don't,' said Tom. 'It is my free choice. If it were not for horrid sick people, I should
      like it.'
Promising! it must be confessed!
Perhaps Tom had expected Norman to brighten at once, but it was a fallacious hope. The
      gaining his point involved no pleasant prospect, and his young brother's moody devotion to
      him, suggested scruples whether he ought to exact the sacrifice, though, in his own mind,
      convinced that it was Tom's vocation; and knowing that would give him many of the advantages
      of an eldest son.
Eton fully justified Hector's declaration that it would not regard the cut of Harry's coat.
      The hero of a lost ship and savage isle, was the object of universal admiration and curiosity,
      and inestimable were the favours conferred by Hector and Tom in giving introductions to him,
      till he had shaken hands with half the school, and departed amid deafening cheers.
In spite of Harry, the day had been long and heavy to Norman,
       and though he chid himself for his depression, he shrank from the sight of Meta
      and Sir Henry Walkinghame together, and was ready to plead an aching head as an excuse for not
      appearing at the evening party; but, besides that this might attract notice, he thought
      himself bound to take care of Harry in so new a world, where the boy must be at a great
      loss.
'I say, old June,' cried a voice at his door, 'are you ready?'
'I have not begun dressing yet. Will you wait?'
'Not I. The fun is beginning.'
Norman heard the light foot scampering down-stairs, and prepared to follow, to assume the
      protection of him.
Music sounded as Norman left his room, and he turned aside to avoid the stream of company
      flowing up the flower-decked stairs, and made his way into the rooms through Flora's boudoir.
      He was almost dazzled by the bright lights, and the gay murmurs of the brilliant throng. Young
      ladies with flowers and velvet streamers down their backs, old ladies portly and bejewelled,
      gentlemen looking civil, abounded wherever he turned his eyes. He could see Flora's graceful
      head bending as she received guest after guest, and the smile with which she answered
      congratulations on her brother's return; but Harry he did not so quickly perceive, and he was
      trying to discover in what corner he might have hidden himself; when Meta stood beside him,
      asking whether their Eton journey had prospered, and how poor Hector was feeling at Harry's
      return?
'Where is Harry?' asked Norman. 'Is he not rather out of his element?'
'No, indeed,' said Meta, smiling. 'Why, he is the lion of the night!'
'Poor fellow, how he must hate it!'
'Come this way, into the front room. There, look at him—is it not nice to see him, so
      perfectly simple and at his ease, neither shy nor elated? And what a fine-looking fellow he
      is!'
Meta might well say so. The trim, well-knit broad-chested form, the rosy embrowned honest
      face, the shining light-brown curly locks, the dancing well-opened blue eyes, and merry hearty
      smile showed to the best advantage, in array that even Tom would not have spurned, put on with
      naval neatness; and his attitude and manner were so full of manly ease, that it was no wonder
      that every eye rested on him with pleasure. Norman smiled at his own mistake, and asked who
      were the lady and gentleman conversing with him? Meta mentioned one of the most distinguished
      of English names, and shared his amusement in seeing Harry talking to them with the same frank
      embarrassed ease, as when he had that morning shaken hands with their son, in the capacity of
      Hector
       Ernescliffe's fag. No one present inspired him with a tithe of the awe he felt
      for a post-captain—it was simply a pleasant assembly of good-natured folks, glad to welcome
      home a battered sailor, and of pretty girls, for whom he had a sailor's admiration, but
      without forwardness or presumption—all in happy grateful simplicity.
'I suppose you cannot dance?' said Flora, to him.
'I!' was Harry's interjection; and while she was looking round for a partner to whom to
      present him, he had turned to the young daughter of his new acquaintance, and had her on his
      arm, unconscious that George had been making his way to her.
Flora was somewhat uneasy, but the mother was looking on smiling, and expressed her delight
      in the young midshipman; and Mrs. Rivers, while listening gladly to his praises, watched
      heedfully, and was reassured to see that dancing was as natural to him as everything else; his
      steps were light as a feather, his movement all freedom and joy, without being boisterous, and
      his boyish chivalry as pretty a sight as anyone could wish to see.
If the rest of the world enjoyed their dances a quarter as much as did "Mr. May," they were
      enviable people, and he contributed not a little to their pleasure, if merely by the sight of
      his blithe freshness, and spirited simplicity, as well as the general sympathy with his
      sister's joy, and the interest in his adventures. He would have been a general favourite, if
      he had been far less personally engaging; as it was, every young lady was in raptures at
      dancing with him, and he did his best to dance with them all; and to try to stir up Norman,
      who, after Meta had been obliged to leave him, and go to act her share of the part of hostess,
      had disposed of himself against a wall, where he might live out the night.
'Ha! June! what makes you stand sentry there? Come and dance, and have some of the fun! Some
      of those girls are the nicest partners in the world. There's that Lady Alice, something with
      the dangling things in her hair, sitting down now—famous at a polka. Come along, I'll
      introduce you—It will do you good.'
'I know nothing of dancing,' said Norman, beginning to apprehend that he might be dragged
      off, as often he had been to cricket or foot-ball, and by much the same means.
'Comes by nature, when you hear the music. Ha! what a delicious polka! Come along, or I must
      be off! She will be waiting for me, and she is the second prettiest girl here! Come!'
'I have been trying to make something of him, Harry,' said the ubiquitous Flora, 'but I
      don't know whether it is mauvaise honte , or headache.'
'I see! Poor old June!' cried Harry. 'I'll get you an ice at once, old fellow! Nothing like
      one for setting a man going!'

Before Norman could protest, Harry had flown off.
'Flora,' asked Norman, 'is—are the Walkinghames here?'
'Yes. Don't you see Sir Henry. That fine-looking man with the black moustache. I want you to
      know him. He is a great admirer of your prize poem, and of Dr. Spencer.'
Harry returning, administered his ice, and then darted off to excuse himself to his partner,
      by explanations about his brother, whom everybody must have heard of, as he was the cleverest
      fellow living, and had written the best prize poem ever heard at Oxford. He firmly believed
      Norman a much greater lion than himself.
Norman was forced to leave his friendly corner to dispose of the glass of his ice, and thus
      encountered Miss Rivers, of whom Sir Henry was asking questions about a beautiful collection
      of cameos, which Flora had laid out as a company trap.
'Here is Norman May,' said Meta—'he knows them better than I do. Do you remember which of
      these is the head of Diana, Norman?'
Having set the two gentlemen to discuss them, she glided away on fresh hospitable duties,
      while Norman repeated the comments that he had so enjoyed hearing from poor Mr. Rivers, hoping
      he was, at least, sparing Meta some pain, and wondering that Flora should have risked hurting
      her feelings by exposing these treasures to the general gaze.
If Norman were wearied by Sir Henry, it was his own fault, for the baronet was a very
      agreeable person, who thought a first-class man worth cultivation, so that the last half hour
      might have compensated for all the rest, if conversation were always the test.
'Why, Meta!' cried Harry, coming up to her, 'you have not once danced! We are a sort of
      brother and sister, to be sure, but that is no hindrance, is it?'
'No,' said Meta, smiling, 'thank you, Harry, but you must find some one more worthy. I do
      not dance this season; at least, not in public. When we get home, who knows what we may
      do?'
'You don't dance! Poor little Meta! And you don't go out! What a pity!'
'I had rather not work quite so hard,' said Meta. 'Think what good fortune I had by staying
      at home last night!'
'I declare!' exclaimed Harry, bewitched by the beaming congratulation of her look, 'I can't
      imagine why Norman had said you had turned into a fine lady! I can't see a bit of it!'
'Norman said I had turned into a fine lady!' repeated Meta. 'Why?'
'Never mind! I don't think so; you are just like papa's humming-bird, as you always
      were, not a bit more of a fine lady than
       any girl here, and I am sure papa would say so. Only old June had got a bad
      headache, and is in one of his old dumps, such as I hoped he had left off. But he can't help
      it, poor fellow, and he will come out of it, by-and-by—so never mind. Hollo! why people are
      going away already. There's that girl without anyone to hand her downstairs.'
Away ran Harry, and presently the brothers and sisters gathered round the fire—George
      declaring that he was glad that nuisance was so well over, and Harry exclaiming, 'Well done,
      Flora! It was capital fun! I never saw a lot of prettier or more good-natured people in my
      life. If I am at home for the Stoneborough ball, I wonder whether my father will let me go to
      it.'
This result of Harry's successful début in high life struck his sister and Norman
      as so absurd that both laughed.
'What's the matter now?' asked Harry.
'Your comparing Flora's party to a Stoneborough ball,' said Norman.
'It is all the same, isn't it?' said Harry. 'I'm sure you are equally disgusted at
      both!'
'Much you know about it,' said Flora, patting him gaily. 'I'm not going to put conceit in
      that lion head of yours, but you were as good as an Indian prince to my party. Do you know to
      whom you have been talking so coolly?'
'Of course. You see, Norman, it is just as I told you. All civilized people are just alike
      when they get into a drawing-room.'
'Harry takes large views of the Genus homo ,' Norman exerted himself to say. 'Being
      used to the black and brown species, he takes little heed of the lesser varieties.'
'It is enough for him that he does not furnish the entertainment in another way,' said
      Flora. 'But, good-night. Meta, you look tired.'
