
CHAPTER XXVI
LONG before this open rupture Jane Hardie had asked her father sorrowfully, whether she was
     to discontinue her intimacy with the Dodds: she thought of course he would say “Yes;” and it
     cost her a hard struggle between inclination and filial duty to raise the question. But Mr.
     Hardie was anxious her friendship with that family should continue; it furnished a channel of
     news, and in case of detection might be useful to avert or soften hostilities; so he answered
     rather sharply, “On no account: the Dodds are an estimable family: pray be as friendly with
     them as ever you can.” Jane coloured with pleasure at this most unexpected reply; but her
     wakeful conscience reminded her, this answer was given in ignorance of her attachment to Edward
     Dodd, and urged her to confession. But at that Nature recoiled: Edward had not openly declared
     his love to her; so modest pride, as well as modest shame, combined with female cowardice to
     hold back the avowal.
So then Miss Tender Conscience tormented herself; and recorded the struggle in her diary; but
     briefly, and in terms vague and typical; not a word about “a young man”—or “crossed in
     love”—but one obscure and hasty slap at the carnal affections, and a good deal about “the
     saints in prison,” and “the battle of Armageddon.”
Yet, to do her justice, laxity of expression did not act upon her conduct and warp that as it
     does most mystical speakers.
To obey her father to the letter, she maintained a friendly correspondence with Julia Dodd,
     exchanging letters daily; but, not to disobey him in the spirit, she ceased to visit Albion
     Villa. Thus she avoided Edward, and extracted from the situation the utmost self-denial, and
     the least possible amount of “carnal pleasure,” as she naively denominated an interchange of
     worldly affection, however distant and respectful.
One day she happened to mention her diary, and say it was a present comfort to her, and
     instructive to review. Julia, catching at every straw of consolation, said she would keep one
     too, and asked a sight of Jane's for a model. “No, dear friend,” said Jane: “a diary should be
     one's self on paper.”
This was fortunate: it precluded that servile imitation, in which her sex excels even mine;
     and consequently the two records reflect two good girls, instead of one in two skins; and may
     be trusted to conduct this narrative forward, and relieve its monotony a little: only, of
     course, the reader must not expect to see the plot of a story carried minutely out in two crude
     compositions written with an object so distinct: he must watch for glimpses and make the most
     of indications. Nor is this an excessive demand upon his intelligence; for, if he cannot do
     this with a book, how will he do it in real life, where male and female characters reveal their
     true selves by glimpses only, and the gravest and most dramatic events give the diviner so few
     and faint signs of their coming?

Extracts from Julia Dodd's Diary.

“Dec. 5th.—It is all over; they have taken papa away to an asylum: and the house is
     like a grave, but for our outbursts of sorrow. Just before he went away the medal came—oh no, I
     cannot. Poor, poor mamma!
“8 P. M. In the midst of our affliction Heaven sent us a ray of comfort: the kindest letter
     from a lady, a perfect stranger. It came yesterday; but now I have got it to copy: oh, bless
     it; and the good, kind writer.”
“'DEAR MADAM,—I scarcely know whether to hope or to fear that your good husband may have
     mentioned my name to you: however, he is just the man to pass over both my misbehaviour and his
     own gallantry; so I beg permission to introduce myself. I and my little boy were passengers by
     the Agra; I was spoiled by a long residence in India, and gave your husband sore
     trouble by resisting discipline, refusing to put out my light at nine o'clock, and in short by
     being an unreasonable woman, or rather a spoiled child. Well, all my little attempts at a feud
     failed; Captain Dodd did his duty, and kept his temper provokingly; the only revenge he took
     was a noble one; he jumped into the sea after my darling Freddy, and saved him from a watery
     grave, and his mother from madness or death; yet he was himself hardly recovered from a wound
     he had received in defending us all against pirates. Need I say more to one who is herself a
     mother? You will know how our little misunderstanding ended after that. As soon as we were
     friends I made him talk of his family; yourself, Edward, Julia, I seem to know you all.
“'When the ruffian, who succeeded our good captain, had wrecked poor us, and then deserted
     us, your husband resumed the command, and saved Freddy and me once more by his courage, his
     wonderful coolness, and his skill. Since then the mouse has been at work for the lion: I
     despair of conveying any pleasure by it to a character so elevated as Captain Dodd; his reward
     must be his own conscience; but we poor little women like external shows, do we not? and so I
     thought a medal of the Humane Society might give some pleasure to you and Miss Dodd. Never did
     medal nor order repose on a nobler heart. The case was so strong, and so well supported, that
     the society did not hesitate: and you will receive it very soon after this.
“'You will be surprised, dear madam, at all this from a stranger to yourself, and will
     perhaps set it down to a wish to intrude on your acquaintance. Well, then, dear madam, you will
     not be far wrong. I should like much to know one, whose character I already seem
     acquainted with; and to convey personally my gratitude and admiration of your husband: I could
     pour it out more freely to you, you know, than to him.—I am, dear Madam, Yours very
     faithfully,
“'LOUISA BERESFORD.'”
“And the medal came about an hour before the fly to take him away. His dear name was on it
     and his brave courageous acts.
“Oh, shall I ever be old enough and hard enough to speak of this without stopping to cry?
“We fastened it round his dear neck with a ribbon. Mamma would put it inside his clothes for
     fear the silver should tempt some wretch; I should never have thought of that: is there a
     creature so base? And we told the men how he had gained it (they were servants of the asylum),
     and we showed them how brave and good he was, and would be again if they would be kind to him
     and cure him. And mamma bribed them with money to use him kindly: I thought they would be
     offended and refuse it: but they took it, and their faces showed she was wiser than I am.
      He keeps away from us too. It is nearly a fortnight now.”
“Dec. 7th.—Aunt Eve left to-day. Mamma kept her room and could not speak to her;
     cannot forgive her interfering between papa and her. It does seem strange that any one but
     mamma should be able to send papa out of the house, and to such a place; but it is the law: and
     Edward, who is all good sense, says it was necessary. He says mamma is unjust; grief makes her
     unreasonable. I don't know who is in the right: and I don't much care; but I know I am sorry
     for Aunt Eve, and very, very sorry for mamma.”
“Dec. 8th.—I am an egotist: found myself out this morning; and it is a good thing to
     keep a diary. It was overpowered at first by grief for mamma: but
     now the house is sad and quiet I am always thinking of him; and that is egotism.
“Why does he stay away so? I almost wish I could think it was coldness or diminished
     affection; for I fear something worse; something to make him wretched. Those dreadful
     words papa spoke before he was afflicted! words I will never put on paper; but they ring in my
     ears still; they appal me: and then found at their very door! Ah! and I knew I should
     find him near that house. And now he keeps away.”
“Dec. 9th.—All day trying to comfort mamma. She made a great effort and wrote to
     Mrs. Beresford.”
 POOR MAMMA'S LETTER 

“DEAR MADAM,—Your kind and valued letter reached us in deep affliction; and I am little able
      to reply to you as you deserve. My poor husband is very ill; so ill that he no longer
      remembers the past, neither the brave acts that have won him your esteem, nor even the face of
      his loving and unhappy wife, who now thanks you with many tears for your sweet letter.
      Heart-broken as my children and I are, we yet derive some consolation from it. We have tied
      the medal round his neck, madam, and thank you far more than we can find words to express.
“In conclusion, I pray Heaven that, in your bitterest hour, you may find the consolation you
      have administered to us: no, no, I pray you may never, never stand in such need of comfort—I
      am dear madam, yours gratefully and sincerely,
“LUCY DODD.”
“Dec. 10th, Sunday.—At St. Anne's in the morning. Tried hard to apply the sermon. He
     spoke of griefs, but so coldly; surely he never felt one; he was not there.
     Mem.: always pray against wandering thoughts on entering church.”
“Dec. 11th.—A diary is a dreadful thing. Everything must go down now, and, amongst
     the rest that the poor are selfish. I could not interest one of mine in mamma's sorrows; no,
     they must run back to their own little sordid troubles, about money and things. I was so
     provoked with Mrs. Jackson (she owes mamma so much) that I left her hastily; and that was
     Impatience. I had a mind to go back to her; but would not; and that was Pride. Where is my
     Christianity?
“A kind letter from Jane Hardie. But no word of him.”
“Dec. 12th.—To-day Edward told me plump I must not go on taking things out of the
     house for the poor: mamma gave me the reason. 'We are poor ourselves, thanks to——' And then she
     stopped. Does she suspect? How can she? She did hear not those two dreadful words of papa's?
     They are like two arrows in my heart. And so we are poor: she says we have scarcely anything to
     live upon after paying the two hundred and fifty pounds a year for papa.”
“Dec. 13th.—A comforting letter from Jane. She sends me Hebrews xii. 11, and says,
     'Let us take a part of the Bible, and read two chapters prayerfully at the same hour of the
     day: will ten o'clock in the morning suit you? and, if so, will you choose where to begin?' I
     will, sweet friend, I will; and then, though some cruel mystery keeps us apart, our souls will
     be together over the sacred page, as I hope they will one day be together in heaven; yours
     will, at any rate. Wrote back, yes, and a thousand thanks, and should like to begin with the
     Psalms; they are sorrowful, and so are we. And I must pray not to think too much of
      him.
“If everything is to be put down one does, I cried long and bitterly to find I had written
     that I must pray to God against him.”
“Dec. 14th.—It is plain he never means to come again. Mamma says nothing, but that
     is out of pity for me: I have not read her dear face all these years for nothing. She is
     beginning to think him unworthy, when she thinks of him at all.”
“There is a mystery; a dreadful mystery; may he not be as mystified, too, and perhaps
     tortured like me with doubts and suspicions? They say he is pale and dejected. Poor thing!
“But then, oh why not come to me and say so? Shall I write to him? No, I will cut my hand off
     sooner.”
“Dec. 16th.—A blessed letter from Jane. She says, 'Letter writing on ordinary
     subjects is a sad waste of time and very unpardonable among His people.' And so it is; and my
     weak hope, daily disappointed, that there may be something in her letter, only shows how
     inferior I am to my beloved friend. She says, 'I should like to fix another hour for us two to
     meet at the Throne together: will five o'clock suit you? We dine at six; but I am never more
     than half an hour dressing.'
“The friendship of this saint, and her bright example, is what Heaven sends me in infinite
     mercy and goodness to sooth my aching heart a little: for him I shall never see
     again.
“I have seen him this very evening.”
“It was a beautiful night: I went to look at—the world to come I call it—for I believe the
     redeemed are to inhabit those very stars hereafter, and visit them all in turn—and this world I
     now find is a world of sorrow and disappointment—so I went on the balcony to look at a better
     one: and oh it seemed so holy, so calm, so pure, that heavenly world I gazed and stretched my
     hands towards it for ever so little of its holiness and purity; and, that moment I heard a
     sigh. I looked, and there stood a gentleman just outside our gate, and it was him. I
     nearly screamed, and my heart beat so. He did not see me: for I had come out softly, and his
     poor head was down, down upon his breast; and he used to carry it so high, a little, little,
     while ago—too high some said; but not I. I looked, and my misgivings melted away, it flashed on
     me as if one of those stars had written it with its own light in my heart—'There stands Grief;
     not Guilt.' And before I knew what I was about I had whispered 'Alfred!' The poor boy started
     and ran towards me: but stopped short and sighed again. My heart yearned; but it was not for me
     to make advances to him, after his unkindness: so I spoke to him as coldly as ever I could, and
     I said, 'You are unhappy.'
“He looked up to me, and then I saw even by that light that he is enduring a bitter, bitter
     struggle: so pale, so worn, so dragged!—Now how many times have I
     cried, this last month? more than in all the rest of my life a great deal.—'Unhappy!' he said;
     'I must be a contemptible thing if I was not unhappy.' And then he asked me should not I
     despise him if he was happy. I did not answer that: but I asked him why he was unhappy. And
     when I had, I was half frightened; for he never evades a question the least bit.
“He held his head higher still, and said, 'I am unhappy because I cannot see the path of
     honour.'
“Then I babbled something, I forget what: then he went on like this—ah, I never forget what
      he says—he said Cicero says 'AEquitas ipsa lucet per se; something significat
     something else:' and he repeated it slowly for me—he knows I know
     a little Latin; and told me that was as much as to say 'Justice is so clear a thing, that
     whoever hesitates must be on the road of wrong. And yet,' he said bitterly, 'I
     hesitate and doubt, in a matter of right and wrong, like an Academic philosopher weighing and
     balancing mere speculative straws.' Those were his very words. 'And so,' said he, 'I am
     miserable; deserving to be miserable.'
“Then I ventured to remind him that he, and I, and all Christian souls, had a resource not
     known to heathen philosophers, however able. And I said, 'Dear Alfred, when I am in doubt and
     difficulty, I go and pray to Him to guide me aright: have you done so?' No, that had never
     occurred to him: but he would, if I made a point of it; and at any rate he could not go on in
     this way. I should soon see him again, and, once his mind was made up, no shrinking from mere
     consequences, he promised me. Then we bade one another good night and he went off holding his
     head as proudly as he used: and poor silly me fluttered, and nearly hysterical, as soon as I
     quite lost sight of him.”
“Dec. 17th.—At church in the morning: a good sermon. Notes and analysis. In the
     evening Jane's clergyman preached. She came. Going out I asked her a question about what we had
     heard; but she did not answer me. At parting she told me she made it a rule not to speak coming
     from church, not even about the sermon. This seemed austere to poor me. But of course she is
     right. Oh, that I was like her.”
“Dec. 18th.—Edward is coming out. This boy, that one has taught all the French, all
     the dancing, and nearly all the Latin he knows, turns out to be one's superior, infinitely: I
     mean in practical good sense. Mamma had taken her pearls to the jeweller and borrowed two
     hundred pounds. He found this out and objected. She told him a part of it was required to keep
     him at Oxford. 'Oh indeed,' said he: and we thought of course there was an end: but next
     morning he was off before breakfast and the day after he returned from Oxford with his caution
     money, forty pounds, and gave it mamma; she had forgotten all about it. And he had taken his
     name off the college books and left the university for ever. The poor, gentle tears of
     mortification ran down his mother's cheeks, and I hung round her neck, and scolded him like a
     vixen—as I am. We might have spared tears and fury both, for he is neither to be melted nor
     irritated by poor little us. He kissed us and coaxed us like a superior being, and set to work
     in his quiet, sober, ponderous way, and proved us a couple of fools to our entire satisfaction,
     and that without an unkind word! for he is as gentle as a lamb, and as strong as ten thousand
     elephants. He took the money back and brought the pearls home again, and he has written 'SOYEZ
     DE VOTRE SIECLE' in great large letters, and has pasted it on all our three bed-room doors,
     inside. And he has been all these years quietly cutting up the Morning Advertiser, and
     arranging the slips with wonderful skill and method. He calls it 'digesting the
      Tiser!'' and you can't ask for any modern information, great or small, but
     he'll find you something about it in this digest. Such a folio! It takes a man to open and shut
     it. And he means to be a sort of little papa in this house, and mamma means to let him. And
     indeed it is so sweet to be commanded; besides, it saves thinking for oneself, and that is such
     a worry.”
“Dec. 19th.—Yes, they have settled it: we are to leave here, and live in lodgings to
     save servants. How we are to exist even so, mamma cannot see; but Edward can: he says we two
     have got popular talents, and he knows the markets (what does that mean, I wonder),
     and the world in general. I asked him wherever he picked it up, his knowledge: he said, 'In the
      'Tiser.' I asked him would he leave the place where she lives. He looked
     sad, but said, 'Yes: for the good of us all.' So he is better than I am; but who is not? I
     wasted an imploring look on him; but not on mamma: she looked back to me, and then said sadly,
     'Wait a few days, Edward, for—my sake.' That meant for poor credulous Julia's, who
     still believes in him. My sweet mother!”
“Dec. 21st.—Told Mamma to-day I would go for a governess, to help her, since we are
     all ruined. She kissed me and trembled; but she did not say 'No;' so it will come to that. He
     will be sorry. When I do go, I think I shall find courage to send him a line: just to say I am
     sure he is not to blame for withdrawing. Indeed how could I ever marry a man whose
     father I have heard my father call——” (the pen was drawn through the rest).
“Dec. 22nd.—A miserable day: low spirited and hysterical. We are really going away.
     Edward has begun to make packing-cases: I stood over him and sighed, and asked him questions:
     he said he was going to take unfurnished rooms in London, send up what furniture is absolutely
     necessary, and sell the rest by auction, with the lease of our dear, dear house, where we were
     all so happy once. So, what with his 'knowledge of the markets, and the world,' and his sense,
     and his strong will, we have only to submit. And then he is so kind, too: 'Don't cry, little
     girl,' he said. 'Not but what I could turn on the waters myself if there was anything to be
     gained by it. Shall I cry, Ju,' said he, 'or shall I whistle? I think I'll whistle.'
     And he whistled a tune right through while he worked with a heart as sick as my own, perhaps.
     Poor Edward!”
“Dec. 23rd.—My Christian friend has her griefs, too. But then she puts them
     to profit: she says today, 'We are both tasting the same flesh-crucifying but soul-profiting
     experience.' Her every word is a rebuke to me: torn at this solemn season of the year with
     earthly passions. Went down after reading her letter, and played and sang the Gloria in
      Excelsis of Pergolesi, with all my soul. So then I repeated it, and burst out crying in
     the middle. Oh shame! shame!”
“Dec. 24th.—Edward started for London at five in the morning to take a place for us.
     The servants were next told, and received warning; the one we had the poorest opinion of, she
     is such a flirt, cried, and begged mamma to let her share our fallen fortunes, and said she
     could cook a little and would do her best. I kissed her violently, and quite forgot I was a
     young lady till she herself reminded me; and she looked frightened at mamma. But mamma only
     smiled through her tears and said, 'Think of it quietly, Sarah, before you commit
     yourself.'”
“I am now sitting in my old room, cold as a stone: for I have packed up some things: so the
     first step is actually taken. Oh, if I but knew that he was happy! Then I could endure
     anything. But how can I think so? Well, I will go, and never tell a soul what I suspect, and he
     cannot tell, even if he knows: for it is his father. Jane, too, avoids all mention of her own
     father and brother more than is natural. Oh, if I could only be a child again!
“Regrets are vain; I will cease even to record them; these diaries feed one's selfishness,
     and the unfortunate passion, that will make me a bad daughter and an ungrateful soldier of Him
     who was born as to-morrow: to your knees, false Christian! to your knees!”
“I am calmer now; and feel resigned to the will of Heaven; or benumbed; or something. I will
     pack this box and then go down and comfort my mother; and visit my poor people, perhaps for the
     last time: ah me!
“A knock at the street door! his knock! I know every echo of his hand, and his foot. Where is
     my composure now? I flutter like a bird. I will not go down. He will think I love him so.
“At least I will wait till he has nearly gone.
“Elizabeth has come to say I am wanted in the drawing-room.
“So I must go down whether I like or no.
“Bedtime. Oh that I had the pen of a writer to record the scene I have witnessed, worthily.
     When I came in, I found mamma and him both seated in dead silence. He rose and looked at me and
     I at him: and years seemed to have rolled over his face since last I saw it. I was obliged to
     turn my head away; I curtseyed to him distantly, and may Heaven forgive me for that: and we sat
     down, and presently turned round and all looked at one another like the ghosts of the happy
     creatures we once were altogether.
“Then Alfred began, not in his old imperative voice, but scarce above a whisper; and oh the
     words such as none but himself in the wide world would have spoken—I love him better than ever;
     I pity him; I adore him; he is a scholar; he is a chevalier; he is the soul of honour; he is
     the most unfortunate and proudest gentleman beneath the sun; oh, my darling! my darling!!
“He said, 'Mrs. Dodd, and you Miss Dodd, whom I loved before I lost the right to ask you to
     be mine, and whom I shall love to the last hour of my miserable existence, I am come to explain
     my own conduct to you, and to do you an act of simple justice, too long delayed. To begin with
     myself, you must know that my understanding is of the Academic School: I incline to weigh
     proofs before I make up my mind. But then I differ from that school in this, that I cannot
     think myself to an eternal standstill; (such an expression! but what does that matter, it was
      his;) I am a man of action: in Hamlet's place I should have either turned my ghost
     into ridicule, or my uncle into a ghost; so I kept away from you while in doubt, but now I
     doubt no longer. I take my line: ladies, you have been swindled out of a large sum of
     money.
“My blood ran cold at these words. Surely nothing on earth but a man could say this right out
     like that.
“Mamma and I looked at one another; and what did I see in her face, for the first time? Why
     that she had her suspicions too, and had been keeping them from me. Pitying angel!
“He went on: 'Captain Dodd brought home several thousand pounds?'
“Mamma said 'Yes.' And I think she was going to say how much, but he stopped her and made her
     write the amount in an envelope, while he took another and wrote in it with his pencil. He took
     both envelopes to me, and asked me to read them out in turn: I did, and mamma's said fourteen
     thousand pounds: and his said fourteen thousand pounds. Mamma looked such a look at me.
“Then he turned to me: 'Miss Dodd, do you remember that night you and I met at Richard
     Hardie's door? Well, scarce five minutes before that, your father was standing on our lawn and
     called to the man, who was my father, in a loud voice—it rings in my ears now—“Hardie, Villain!
     give me back my money, my fourteen thousand pounds! give me my children's money, or may your
     children die before your eyes.” Ah, you wince to hear me whisper these dreadful words: what if
     you had been where I was and heard them spoken, and in a terrible voice; the voice of Despair;
     the voice of Truth! Soon a window opened cautiously, and a voice whispered, “Hush! I'll bring
     it you down.” And this voice was the voice of fear, of dishonesty, and of Richard
     Hardie.'
“He turned deadly white when he said this, and I cried to mamma, 'Oh, stop him! stop him!'
     And she said, 'Alfred, think what you are saying. Why do you tell us what we had better never
     know?' He answered directly.
“'Because it is the truth: and because I loathe injustice. Some time afterwards I taxed Mr.
     Richard Hardie with this fourteen thousand pounds: and his face betrayed him. I taxed his
     clerk, Skinner: and Skinner's face betrayed him: and he fled the town that very night.
“My mother looked much distressed and said, 'To what end do you raise this pitiable subject?
     Your father is a bankrupt, and we but suffer with the rest.'
“'No, no,' said he, 'I have looked through the bankrupt's books, and there is no mention of
     the sum. And then who brought Captain Dodd here? Skinner? and Skinner is his detected
     confederate. It is clear to me poor Captain Dodd trusted that sum to us before he had
     the fit; beyond this all is conjecture.'
“Mamma looked at me again, and said, 'What am I to do; or say?'
'I screamed, 'Do nothing, say nothing: oh pray, pray make him hold his tongue, and let the
     vile money go. It is not his fault.'
“'Do?' said the obstinate creature: 'why tell Edward, and let him employ a sharp attorney:
     you have a supple antagonist and a daring one. Need I say I have tried persuasion, and even
     bribes: but he defies me. Set an attorney on him, or the police. Fiat Justitia, ruat coelum.' I
     put both hands out to him and burst out 'Oh, Alfred, why did you tell? A son expose his own
     father? For shame; for shame! I have suspected it all long ago: but I would never have
     told.'
“He started a little; but said, 'Miss Dodd, you were very generous to me: but that is not
     exactly a reason why I should be a cur to you; and an accomplice in a theft by which you
     suffer. I have no pretensions to religion like my sister: so I can't afford to tamper with
     plain right and wrong. What, look calmly on and see one man defraud another? I can't do it. See
      you defrauded? you, Mrs. Dodd, for whom I profess affection and friendship? You, Miss
     Dodd, for whom I profess love and constancy? Stand and see you swindled into poverty? Of what
     do you think I am made? My stomach rises against it, my blood boils against it, my flesh creeps
     at it, my soul loathes it:' then after this great burst he seemed to turn so feeble:
     'Oh,' said he, faltering, 'I know what I have done; I have signed the death warrant of our
     love, dear to me as life. But I can't help it. Oh, Julia, Julia, my lost love, you can never
     look on me again; you must not love a man you cannot marry. Cheat Hardie's wretched son. But
     what could I do? Fate offers me but the miserable choice of desolation or cowardly rascality. I
     choose desolation and I mean to stand by my choice like a man. So good-bye, ladies.'
“The poor proud creature rose from his seat, and bowed stiffly and haughtily to us both, and
     was going away without another word, and I do believe for ever. But his soul had been too great
     for his body; his poor lips turned pale and he staggered; and would have fallen, but mamma
     screamed to me, and she he loves so dearly, and abandons so cruelly, woke from a stupor of
     despair, and flew and caught him fainting in these arms.”
