
  CHAPTER XL.
Life is indeed a complicated and mysterious drama, in which Agnes felt more and more
     dissatisfied with the part she had to play. Harrowgate had been the threatre of many
     interesting scenes to her; but now Lord Doncaster had departed with a vaguely-expressed hope of
     her visiting him at Kilmarnock Abbey; and when Sir Arthur felt sufficiently recovered to begin
     his long-desired progress towards home, she slowly and sadly prepared to accompany him.
Before they reached Portobello, winter had already covered the earth in a shroud of snow and
     of ice; the birds no longer carolled gladly on the boughs; the rustling leaves had ceased to
     fall; the naked trees hung their dejected branches, in bare and stern desolation, and the
     blood-red sun glittered on the cold and barren fields. "Winter's dumb." All life and joyfulness
     had departed from the face of nature, which looked, as Agnes remarked, like a wedding-cake
     without the ornaments; and amidst weeks of dreary discontent, she compared the death-like
     contrast of nature now, from what it had been, to her own sadly altered feelings. She appeared
     constantly now to be in a state of restless, almost feverish excitement, always, evidently,
     expecting some event which never happened, while she became daily more depressed and
     irritable.
Marion, in the mean time, during many a long and dreary evening, resolutely buried beneath a
     smiling aspect, her own anxiety respecting Mr. Granville's unaccountable silence, and devoted
     herself as entirely to Sir Arthur's comfort, as if there had not existed another being upon the
     earth; yet still, every knock at the door made her heart palpitate with hope, and every note
     brought into the room, caused her a new pang of disappointment and surprise.
If a grain of hope or joy were to be found in any circumstances, Marion's was a mind to sift
     out and enjoy it; and her buoyant spirit now shielded her from a too sensitive
     apprehensiveness, while she repelled the withering fears that might have forced themselves on a
     heart less candid and trusting. Her whole spirit rebelled against a vagrant thought of Richard
     Granville's inconstancy or indifference; though in Sir Patrick's letters from the continent,
     there was much that might have insinuated distrust into her thoughts; but Marion clung to the
     unswerving belief of her lover's infallible truth. She knew that the stamp of Christian
     excellence was on his whole character, engrained in his very being, and only to decay with life
     itself; therefore her opinion was not at the mercy of any idle representations; but the blast
     which might have uprooted a superficial attachment, only deepened the root of her own, which
     nothing could undermine.
Mr. Granville, in the mean time, having long ceased to hope for any answer to his letters,
     became more and more impatient for the time when he might seek a personal interview with
     Marion, of whose constancy not a doubt ever crossed his imagination; while day after day he
     watched with saddening apprehension over the declining health of his sister, whose failing
     strength required all the affectionate attentions he lavished on her, especially when, after a
     few weeks, Sir Patrick also arrived at Florence, and Clara shrunk with blighting, heart-broken
     grief, from every engagement that might endanger her meeting him. She mournfully acknowledged,
     that having at first esteemed as well as loved him, she was still unable to conquer her
     misplaced affection; and that while nothing could induce her to unite her fate to Sir
     Patrick's, or to place her happiness in his care, still the painful consciousness that he was
     unworthy and dishonored, weighed the more deeply upon her spirit, and crushed her whole heart
     with anguish.
The constancy with which Sir Patrick tried to regain her affection was deeply touching to
     Clara's young mind; and in vain she tried to blot out his name with her tears. Still, Mr.
     Granville, with inextinguishable hope, continued to believe that the germ of life must be
     stronger than it seemed; but day after day she faded and drooped. Change of air had done less
     than nothing for Clara's feeble frame and wasted strength; while she spoke often, with a smile
     of affectionate interest, respecting her brother's future life, though he observed with
     emotion, that her own name was never included, and that only when talking of a world hereafter,
     did she speak now of their being together.
"We must die to be perfectly happy," observed Clara, one day, in a tone of calm and elevated
     peace. "My sun has set in the morning, Richard; and it might have seemed hard thus early to
     leave such a world, so beautiful, so fragrant, so joyous, and embellished by such affection as
     yours; but we know that sin has destroyed this whole magnificent creation; that misery, decay,
     and death, are hid beneath all. It is the glorious discovery of Christianity that we are
     immortal; that we are created, not for time, but for eternity! So long as my spirit continues
     to lodge in this most fragile of human bodies, I must have sorrow and suffering to prepare me
     for throwing off the homely garb of an earthly nature, and assuming the glorious garments of
     heaven."
Mr. Granville covered his face with his hands, unable for some moments to reply, while Clara
     continued, in a tone of solemn sadness and fervent emotion—
"The near approach of death fills my heart with strange and wonderful thoughts! When, like
     the lightning from the cloud, my soul departs from the body, O then, Richard, how I shall learn
     to know the value of our immortal salvation! It bewilders me now to think, that I myself shall
     survive that glorious sun, the solid earth, and all the wonders around us; that I shall see and
     understand all the miracles of creation; that I shall know and love all the wisest and best of
     human beings who ever existed on the earth; and that I shall then be wiser than the wisest, as
     well as happier than the happiest of mortals. Richard! that is marvellous! and were it not for
     leaving you, I could rejoice with a joy that is unspeakable, and full of glory."
Mr. Granville clasped Clara's emaciated hand in his own, and would have spoken, but his voice
     failed; and after an ineffectual effort, fearful of agitating his sister, he turned away and
     was silent; but she saw his unutterable grief, and continued,
"You could have borne this better if it had been yourself, Richard; but I leave you in the
     hands, not only of an atoning Saviour, but also of a sympathising friend, who will send you
     comfort according to your utmost need; and, my dear brother, let us now remember, that as the
     infidel La Harpe said, there is one text in Scripture sufficient either to live or to die on,
     'God so loved the world, as to give his only Son, that whosoever believeth on Him should not
     perish, but have everlasting life.'"
Mr. Granville solemnly bent his head in token of acquiescence, and closed his eyes, but large
     tears, notwithstanding every effort, coursed each other down his face, and he avoided looking
     round, while Clara in tremulous accents continued—
"Before long I shall live only in your memory, and well do I know the place you will give me
     there; but remember, dear Richard, when my mortal frame is dissolved, that you will have
     another relative then awaiting you in heaven, and that I shall yet be in as active a state of
     consciousness there as here. When we are separated, you must still sometimes revive old times,
     by reading with Marion the books I have loved—by listening to the music I have delighted in—by
     walking in my accustomed haunts at home—by rearing my favorite flowers—and most of all, console
     yourself, my dear brother, by reflecting, that when you and Marion are both worshiping God
     together on earth, I shall also be adoring Him in heaven:—

'Tis sweet, as year by year we lose
Friends out of sight, in faith to muse
How grows in Paradise our store.'"

The wintry year rolled on till Christmas eve, when Agnes, with a discontented yawn, loudly
     wished that she had been born in the planet Jupiter, where there was no winter at all. That
     night she announced after tea to Sir Arthur, that she was about to leave home for several weeks
     next day, being engaged to spend some time with her friend, Mrs. O'Donoghoe. A considerable air
     of trepidation appeared in her voice and manner when she spoke; and Marion, having recently
     observed that her sister's thoughts were continually pre-occupied, felt startled and amazed at
     the look of agitated determination with which she intimated her approaching departure, after
     which she hurried towards the door, anxious apparently to avoid all discussion; but Sir Arthur,
     in a tone of mild authority, called her back, and drawing in his breath between his compressed
     lips with evident vexation, he assumed an air of grave but ironical humor.
"May I take the liberty of inquiring, Agnes, whether you have fully investigated all the
     stories we heard at Harrowgate respecting Mrs. O'Donoghoe's former connection with Lord
     Doncaster, and what she actually is, before I consent, on very short notice, to entrust her
     with my niece."
"Oh! she is everything on earth most delightful! You need not have a minute's anxiety about
     me, uncle Arthur! I can take excellent care of myself. Nobody knows my own value better than I
     do!"
"Convince me of that, Agnes, if possible; but you are aware that my whole heart abhors your
     recent very unaccountable intimacy with that contemptible old roue, who
     shall be nameless," replied Sir Arthur, with strong, deliberate emphasis. "Any continuance of
     that exceedingly familiar intercourse would be utterly improper; and as for a young girl of
     your appearance setting out on a wild ramble with any Irish adventuress recommended by Lord
     Doncaster, let me hear of her having some very different introduction, or I cannot allow you to
     go."
"My dear uncle! I would dig my own grave and bury myself, if anything prevented me! As for
     your permission," exclaimed Agnes, her whole face illuminated with angry eagerness, "I shall
     certainly be most happy to have it; but if people strain the cord too tight, it sometimes snaps
     altogether. I have made myself a positive promise never to decline a good offer, and go I must.
     Mrs. O'Donoghoe is to take me in her own carriage, free, gratis, and for nothing. Only think
     how very kind!"
"My dear Agnes," replied Sir Arthur, while his brow darkened with mournful anxiety, "I cannot
     wonder if you tire of the dull, monotonous house I have to offer you. A perfect mausoleum
     indeed! It is a premature old age for girls like you and Marion to be, evening after evening,
     the companions of a solitary old man. Often, of late, have I considered in vain how it could be
     remedied. Yet, my dear girl, there might be a solitude far worse, if you lose the respect of
     others, and the peace of mind you may enjoy with me. Hearing what I have lately done of Mrs.
     O'Donoghoe, and knowing all I do of Lord Doncaster and the Abbe Mordaunt, I must lay my
     positive prohibition on your accompanying them now. You may think me a whimsical old man; but,
     Agnes, you cannot long be troubled with my care. Loaded as I am with the weight of years and
     infirmities, my life is like a spark on the ocean. Its fleeting joys and troubled thoughts are
     drawing rapidly to a close; but if these were the last words I am ever to speak, you must not
     go unprotected into such society."
The Admiral walked with slow and musing steps up and down the room, his fine countenance
     flushed with agitation, and his eyes shaded by his long white hair, exhibiting an expression of
     mournful solicitude. Marion's heart swelled with agitation, while inwardly moralizing on the
     officiousness of Irish widows, and Agnes bit her beautiful lip with a look of resolute
     determination, flashing glances of angry surprise at her uncle, and pouting her beautiful lip,
     though the reverence which Sir Arthur never failed to inspire kept her silent.
"Tell me, Agnes," continued he, stopping at length before her, with a look of benignant
     kindness, "is there anything within the compass of my powers that could be done to make up for
     this disappointment? We who are old must not forget that there are pleasures for the young
     which they naturally wish to enjoy. If there be any place you wish particularly to see——"
"It is not places, but people, that I care for!" interrupted Agnes, peevishly. "With respect
     to this excursion, it is impossible for me to get off. I shall go deranged if you interfere
     with it! The party is made on purpose for me, the horses are bespoken, my things all sent to
     Mrs. O'Donoghoe's, and nothing left for me but to bid you good-bye!"
"This is little short of an elopement, Agnes!" replied Sir Arthur, with a mild but resolute
     countenance, while there was a tone of strong resentment in his voice. "What good object can
     there be in a scheme so clandestinely begun! But I have no legal authority to detain you, if
     affection and kindness are insufficient!—One thing only let me say, painful as it is to my
     feelings," added the Admiral, while his whole frame shook with emotion, and he walked several
     times across the room. "In the name of your father, Agnes, I forbid you to leave my roof with
     the party you speak of; and if, in defiance of all propriety, you do go, then—I would have
     said, never return here again; but no!—I cannot say that to my brother's child. No!—till my
     home is in the grave, you may share it with me. Come back when you will, Agnes, and if I am
     alive, you shall be welcomed."
Marion caught the hand of Sir Arthur in her own, and kissed it with ardent affection, while
     she felt a tightening in her throat, and a mist before her eyes, till tears fell fast and
     thick, like rain, upon her cheek; but Agnes, with whom kindness, in its most impressive form,
     could excite no generous impulse, rose in silence, and hurried out of the room.
That night, after Marion had been asleep for several hours, she suddenly started up in bed,
     with that bewildered feeling of perplexity experienced by those who are unexpectedly aroused at
     an unusual hour. It was four o'clock in the morning, and a pale, cold, livid moon-beam streamed
     faintly into the room, giving a chilled and spectral aspect to all around. A death-like
     stillness reigned beside her, and unable to account for having been so suddenly disturbed, she
     was about once more to consign herself to repose, when she heard the noise, repeated which she
     had begun to fancy must have been only a dream. She listened in trembling astonishment, for it
     seemed as if in her uncle's room over-head, some persons were trampling up and down the room,
     drawers opening and shutting, heavy weights falling on the floor, and a sound sometimes reached
     her, as if several carpenters were at work.
Finding there was no mistake, Marion sprung out of bed, threw on her dressing-gown, rushed up
     stairs, and having hastily thrown open the door, she stood there transfixed for a moment with
     amazement and fear. Through the glimmering dawn of light, she saw that Sir Arthur was up, and
     completely dressed, while he appeared to be hurriedly groping about the room, as if packing up
     for a journey. He seemed unconscious of Marion's entrance, who stood for several minutes
     watching him in speechless perplexity and consternation, while her very blood forgot to flow,
     when she saw the stony look of his eyes. His countenance was of an ashy paleness, his long grey
     hair matted over his forehead, his expression sad beyond mortality, and when she took his hand
     in her own, it felt cold and damp. His eyes wandered over her face for a moment, without any
     apparent recognition, and then giving a smile of utter vacancy, he resumed his occupation with
     restless eagerness.
"Uncle Arthur! dear uncle Arthur! what are you doing?" exclaimed Marion, throwing her arms
     round him, while her limbs were faint, and trembled with fear. "Speak, dear uncle! Speak to
     your own Marion! Why do you not speak?"
A deep silence ensued. Sir Arthur evidently did not hear her. His cold, livid lips moved as
     if he would have spoken, but not a sound became audible, and with the same vacant smile as
     before, he turned away. The terror-stricken Marion now felt utterly appalled. A death-like
     sickness came over her, horror and darkness seemed gathering over her mind, and apprehensive
     lest her senses might entirely fail, she hastily and vehemently rang the bell, calling loudly
     for assistance.
Marion's was an intellect of that high tone which rises to meet a great emergency, and though
     nearly paralyzed by grief and terror, when she first saw the fearful, ghastly smile, with which
     her uncle gazed around him, she now endeavored, by gentle persuasion, to make him lie down in
     his bed, and tried, by speaking in accents of tenderness, to recall his recollection, while
     impatiently longing for Martin to appear; and during the few minutes that elapsed till he
     entered, it seemed as if time itself had ceased to move.
The doctor was at length summoned, and having pronounced the Admiral's illness to be caused
     by an oppression of the brain, threatening apoplexy, he attempted to bleed his patient, though
     almost without success; for Marion observed, while she held him in her arms, that the blood
     scarcely flowed, till after some time he uttered a fearful, convulsive cry, which rang through
     the room, and fell back in a violent spasm, the immediate precursor of apoplexy.
Awe-struck and paralyzed with grief, Marion clung to her uncle, and remained by his side,
     watching with deep and solemn affection every turn of his features; while her cheek assumed the
     hue of death, her tearless eyes were motionless, her quivering lips compressed, and she
     remained as silent and immoveable as if the mortal shaft had reached herself. Without shedding
     a tear or breathing a sigh, she bent over the distorted countenance of Sir Arthur, and assisted
     in cutting off the long white locks of his hair, which she had often loved to look upon, but
     which were now strewed all unheeded on the bed, and again seating herself by his side, she
     riveted his hand in her own, becoming white and motionless as an image of marble.
Notice had been sent to Agnes' room of the afflicting event which had taken place, and Marion
     expected every instant that her sister would appear; but time passed on, and she came not,
     being one who systematically avoided any scenes of distress, therefore she satisfied herself
     with sending frequent messages of inquiry to the door. At length, after some hours, Sir Arthur
     appeared to have recovered his recollection; for he looked at Marion with a feeble smile of
     deep affection, and laid his hand on her head as if to bless her; but words were denied him; he
     struggled in vain to speak; and she who had not yet found the solace of a tear, now bursting
     into an irresistible agony of weeping, sobbed aloud. After gazing long and tenderly in her
     face, Sir Arthur's eye-lids at length closed with fatigue, and still clasping her hand in his,
     he fell into a peaceful, quiet slumber of many hours' duration.
Those who have most leisure to contemplate death, generally think least about it, and no one
     had ever meditated less on the subject than Agnes. She occasionally remarked, when the
     infirmities of the old and the indigent were forced upon her notice, that they might hope soon
     to be released, and that to them it must, of course, be a happy escape. The busy and active,
     she thought, had scarcely time to die; and, for herself, she considered death as a very
     unpleasant subject, which fifty years hence must be attended to, when the joys and the dreams
     of her present life had vanished; but it seemed to her most preposterous now, to lower her
     spirits by melancholy reflections on what could not certainly be avoided, and would come only
     too soon in the end. In short, her whole plan of life was, "To-day to sparkle, and to-morrow
     die."
Marion had stolen away to complete her midnight toilette, before she settled for the day
     beside Sir Arthur's pillow, when she was amazed near the door to meet Agnes, hurrying past in
     travelling costume, and anxious, apparently, to avoid being seen, though, when an interview
     became inevitable, she tried to carry it off with careless audacity, being evidently in a
     perfect delirium of high spirits, which she vainly tried to conceal.
"Well, Marion! I am quite relieved to hear from Martin that there is not the slightest
     danger! The doctors also say that everything has taken a favorable turn, though, as for their
     opinion, I have despised all physicians from Esculapius down to the magnesia-and-rhubarb
     doctors of the present day. They all tell us the same thing of an invalid, 'If he does not die,
     he will certainly recover!'"
Marion listened with a look of grave and melancholy surprise; while Agnes, trying not to seem
     aware of it, and evidently anxious to avoid any reply, fixed her eyes on the door, as if
     impatient to proceed, and continued, in rapid accents of assumed bravado—
"You are looking really ill, Marion, and must have got a dreadful fright! It would have
     killed me altogether! But make your mind easy, for these attacks are, I am told, very common.
     The Duke of Middlesex had ten or twelve, and people live often for years after the first, which
     is a great comfort."
"They do sometimes, but not always," replied Marion, with mournful gravity. "My dear Agnes,
     do not be too sanguine. This is a very serious attack. You may hope, but I cannot; for it seems
     to me that our uncle is laid on a bed from which he will never rise again."
"Oh! you are nervous, after being so frightfully alarmed this morning. It must have been very
     shocking," said Agnes, shaking her well-arranged ringlets, and attempting to get up a
     melancholy look; but in her mind there never was any of that gentle, feminine apprehensiveness
     for others, which is so amiable and so endearing. "I feel quite confident that in a few days he
     will recover; but for the present, Marion, you see everything through a darkened glass. I have
     no fears whatever," added she, in a tone of superior wisdom. "Old people always remind me of a
     creaking door, forever complaining, but never any worse! It is lucky for those who have nerves
     to endure it all. I have none; therefore being of no earthly use here, I should be quite in the
     way. Indeed, a single week of moping at home, with fright and anxiety, would lay me up
     also."
"You are not going, Agnes? Impossible! Listen to me for five minutes."
"I am not equal to the exertion! What can I do? It is out of the question to break off my
     engagement now! I am really between the horns of a dilemma, and must be tossed upon one or
     other of them. Both Mrs. O'Donoghoe and Lord Doncaster have set their hearts upon having me;
     and, as the schoolboys say in their speeches, 'It must be so! Agnes, thou reason'st well!'"
"If we are sisters, hear me," replied Marion, in accents of breathless indignation. "Agnes!
     you cannot, you must not think of going."
"But, as the lover says in the Critic, 'I can, I must, I will, I ought, I do!' Marion, you do
     not know the importance I attach to my excursion, which will last only a few days. As for this
     absurd affair of Sir Arthur's, you think every breeze a hurricane; but it is well over now,
     and, since he is ordered quietness, he will miss me the less, or perhaps not at all, if you
     never mention my absence. Certainly my forte is not in a sick-room, and yours is. My chief
     fault, as an attendant on sick people, is, that I am good for nothing. As for danger, Marion, I
     do not see any."
"Or, rather, you will not see any. Agnes, I would not for ten thousand worlds leave him now.
     Our best—almost our only friend, and probably dying," exclaimed Marion, while hot, scalding
     tears rushed in torrents from her eyes. "The question now is not, whether Sir Arthur will be
     restored as he was to us? but only, how many days or hours he can be kept from the grave. Every
     passing moment is a knell of death to my heart, when I think how few more we shall see before
     he is gone forever. If you consider nothing but mere appearances, Agnes, you ought to
     stay."
"As for appearances," replied she, clasping her bracelet, "I am of opinion with the Abbe
     Mordaunt on that point, as on most others, that those who study appearances have seldom any
     realities to boast of."
"Such sentiments might be expected from such a man, but I should not certainly have supposed
     you would act upon them, especially now. Believe me, Agnes, your own heart will reproach you
     forever after. The danger is immediate and very great," said Marion, while her tears fell drop
     by drop on the ground. "My uncle is hovering over the very brink of the grave, therefore, for
     my sake, and for his sake, do not leave us."
"But for my own sake I must! You have a teazing, exaggerated way of stating things; but pray,
     remember now, Marion, the maxim Madame D'Ambert taught us at school, 'Pour
      porter legerement la vie, il faut glisser sur bien des choses!' I always prefer hopes to
     fears, and hate that desolate, dreary look of yours, this morning. You wish to rule and direct
     everybody, but I will not be governed or trampled on," said Agnes, in an angry imperious tone.
     "I did not suppose as much could be said on any subject in the world as you have said upon
     this. One would think, from your way of talking, that Sir Arthur was nobody's uncle but yours;
     or that I did not know how to act for myself! Well! I hope, for my own especial happiness, very
     soon to be independent of those who never have appreciated me."
"At all events, we have loved you, Agnes."
"Yes! of course. Ah! here is the carriage! Good bye, then! Sir Arthur will never miss me
     while you remain; but write often, though where in the wide world to direct your letters is
     more than I remember; but, Marion, we see in the Times newspaper every day, advertisements
     entreating persons who have left their homes to return, that all their wishes may be granted,
     therefore, when you and Sir Arthur want me back, pray insert something of that kind. Good
     bye!"
With heightened color, and eyes fixed on the ground, Marion received the hand of Agnes, and
     gave her one parting look of expostulation, hoping to the last that nature and feeling might
     yet make themselves heard; but when Agnes had sprung into Mrs. O'Donoghoe's carriage, and
     kissed her hand with a parting smile, every trace of agitation vanished from the face of
     Marion, but a band of iron seemed around her head and her heart, as she slowly turned away,
     disgusted and astonished at her sister's heartless levity, and in the privacy of her own room,
     she sank upon her knees and offered up solemn, fervent prayers for the many to whom she was
     attached, but, above all, for her much-loved uncle.
