
  CHAPTER XVIII.
It is the greatest height of wisdom to be happy, but the happiest periods of existence are
     the most difficult to describe; and from this time forth, within the domestic circle of Mr.
     Granville, Marion was introduced into a scene of such refined and intellectual enjoyment, that
     it seemed to her as if she had hitherto beheld the picture of life, painted only by some
     inferior artist, coarsely daubed over with glaring hues, and vulgarly discolored; but it now
     appeared to her in all the graceful symmetry, subdued harmony, and exquisite coloring of a
     great master.
Marion's natural taste had revolted from the mean, reckless, exaggerated caricatures of
     happiness, which had been exhibited to her in Sir Patrick's riotous revellings, and in her
     sister's feverish excitement; while Agnes wasted her heart and feelings in building up romances
     for herself, very much in the Minerva press and Adela-de-Montmorency school; but now the
     morality appeared in all its true fascination and inestimable worth to Marion, when she saw
     real felicity formed upon that divine model, which she had before imagined, but never seen.
While sharing the pure joys and peaceful happiness of Clara and Richard, scarcely a thought
     of Marion's heart remained unspoken, except her secret and increasing consciousness of the wide
     disparity between that home, where she found nothing but a heartless desolation or neglect of
     her best feelings, and the beautiful exemplification of domestic felicity to which she had now
     been introduced. Every occupation or amusement in which she engaged with her friends, became
     enhanced in pleasure and importance, by the consciousness, that beyond the mere gratification
     of the moment, it was consecrated to a higher and better aim; that it might be remembered
     hereafter without remorse, and that it was but a link in the bright chain of eternal happiness
     for which they were all preparing, and which they expected all to enjoy together, by the light
     of that sun which never sets, but shines beyond the grave.
The Christian friendship of a brother and sister for each other, is perhaps the purest and
     happiest of all earthly attachments, for there is not an hour of life from childhood to old
     age, in which they have not experienced the same joys and the same sorrows, known every
     vicissitude of existence together, acquired the same habits, wept for the same sorrows,
     rejoiced in the same prosperity, and cherished the same hopes. The affection of Clara and
     Richard was not the transient union of two individuals thrown together by the accident of
     birth, united by mere instinct, living in contact for convenience, and expecting to be finally
     separated by death; but it was the deep, strong, heart-felt attachment of a Christian family,
     linked together for mutual support in sunshine or shadow, tenderly to assist each other along
     the difficult path of life, happy in the blessings that were given them now, and happier still
     in the expectation of those yet to come in that "new heaven and new earth, wherein dwelleth
     righteousness."
As Mr. Granville's character became more known to Marion, and the interest with which he
     listened to her thoughts and feelings perceptibly increased, she could not but secretly indulge
     sometimes in the thought, presumptuous though it seemed to herself, how different life might
     yet become, if the preference already so obviously testified were by any "strange
     impossibility" to increase, till he became allied, to her by the strictest tie of perpetual
     friendship, and their lives and affections were mingled into one. Marion's young heart glowed
     with emotion when she thought how her feelings would all then be understood, her affections
     appreciated, her happiness cared for, and every trivial incident of her life rendered doubly
     important, because it belonged to another as well as to herself—to one who would share all her
     thoughts, direct all her actions, and mingle with every Christian motive to exertion, the
     desire to please him in her own happy home.
The attachment of Agnes for Captain De Crespigny was like that of a child for its rattle,
     compared with the ennobling sentiment of which Marion's heart was capable, for there a mine of
     undiscovered affections lay buried and unknown, while every deeper emotion had hitherto been
     repelled or neglected by all around, except her uncle, and she could not but tremble to think,
     if her affections were ever warmed into life by reciprocal attachment, how inconceivable must
     be the misery or the happiness which would ensue. She indulged in no fallacious expectations of
     life, no romantic dreams of never-ending happiness and never-dying love, which originate in
     unreasonable expectation, and too certainly end in bitter disappointment; but, to be the object
     of Mr. Granville's unchangeable confidence and affection, his companion in sickness as much as
     in health, the sharer of his sorrows as well as his joys, a participator in all his duties,
     and, most of all, to testify her gratitude for his preference, by devoted attachment on her own
     part, not bounded within the perishable limits of a mere earthly tie—these were the silent,
     unspoken wishes of Marion, which glanced through her mind often, as she hurried home, late and
     unwillingly, to St. John's Lodge, and which caused her bright eye to beam with additional
     lustre, or brought the color in a richer carnation to her cheek.
Events always happen when least expected, and if there be a day in life when any one in this
     world of change can feel peculiarly certain that nothing remarkable shall occur, that is
     probably the period when the most remarkable events take place. Marion had gone with Clara and
     her brother to spend a quiet day among the romantic glens of Roslin, when, finding herself
     alone with Mr. Granville, in one of the most beautiful parts of the rocky glen, she was
     suddenly astonished by his making her, with manly frankness, and yet evident diffidence, an
     explicit declaration of his attachment. He said, on the occasion, all that could be said by
     such a man, with the eloquence of deep emotion; and, encouraged by the timid pleasure with
     which Marion evidently listened to his words, Mr. Granville laid open the whole depths of a
     heart in which all that was ennobling in nature had become embellished by all the purifying
     influences of religion, while she, with tears and blushes, heard thus unexpectedly what
     promised her the utmost sum of human felicity, and she attempted not to conceal how highly,
     beyond all expression, she appreciated his preference and attachment.
There is a language of the heart which words cannot express,—thoughts, feelings, and
     affections too deep to be told, but revealed only in the eyes and voice, when with sincerity of
     emotion, such as Mr. Granville's, a long concealed attachment is at last declared.
"I have asked myself a thousand times whether I could make you happy, and if I believed,"
     said he, "that there lived a man upon the earth who could love you more, or make you happier
     than myself, I would endeavor to resign all hope; but I know the lasting nature of my
     attachment, which time itself cannot alter, nor death finally extinguish; and if such affection
     as mine, with nothing else to offer, can make you happy, it will be a new motive to exertion on
     my part, and a new source of thankfulness to the Divine Giver of all good. Your brother knows
     better than most men the pecuniary embarrassment in which a long-continued law-suit has plunged
     me, and that my future income may not perhaps be large, but consult him,—and my very dear
     Marion, as I must for once be allowed to call you, consult your own wishes and your happiness.
     Before giving me a final answer, take some days to consider——"
"Not an hour,—or a moment," replied Marion, frankly, but with a faltering voice and
     glistening eye, while a vivid blush dyed her cheek, "I need only consider whether my own heart
     be worthy of you! I have thought sometimes,—I have dreamed of such happiness as ours shall be,
     but little did I hope ever to see it more than realized now!"
Love is with lovers an endless subject, and hours appeared like moments, while they conversed
     together on the past and the future with new feelings of confidence and joy, and the whole
     beautiful scenery around seemed as it were haunted by the spirit of thought and of enjoyment,
     while it was with a thrilling emotion of deep gratification that Marion now felt undoubtingly
     conscious that she had become indeed an object of preference to Mr. Granville, that she would
     be thought of always by one whom she could never forget, that she knew the whole story of his
     heart and affections, and that these were devoted,—ardently devoted to herself; and now
     resolutely discarding every apprehension of future difficulties or sorrows, all around took the
     color of her happiness, and she lived only in the joy of the present hour. Nothing required
     concealment between them, and it seemed the sole object of both to open up the most secret
     recesses of their minds, comparing opinions and feelings, while before long it appeared strange
     to Marion that a time had ever existed when their hearts were unknown to each other. No
     caprices, no misunderstandings, no jealousies could arise between them, for there seemed to be
     but one heart and one mind in common, from the moment when Marion whispered her confession,
     that their attachment was reciprocal.

Oh! there are looks and tones that dart,
An instant sunshine through the heart,
As if the soul that minute caught,
Some treasure it through life had sought.

At length they were warned to return homewards, by the golden light of a setting sun, which
     yet looked in glowing majesty over the distant hills, and sprinkled its glory on the highest
     tops of the trees, till they were tipped with fire; but Marion paused, in delighted admiration,
     on the centre of a rustic fairy-bridge, like a spider's web, thrown across the narrowest and
     deepest part of the swollen stream. Among rock and moss, tufted with weeping birch, the
     overhanging cliffs here formed themselves into two sides of a natural arch, in which nature had
     apparently omitted the key-stone, though art had supplied the deficiency, by a slight bridge,
     underneath which the sparkling waters boiled and thundered on with bewildering rapidity, like a
     stream of light, bounding and leaping, with a clamorous brawling uproar, along the rocky
     channel, and disappearing behind a bold promontory, over-grown with tall pines, and twisted
     with the knotted and gnarled roots of many an ancient oak.
The country seemed indeed clothed with a prodigality of beauty—the wild confusion of
     rocks—the feathered branches of a hundred trees—the sparkling sunbeams, sprinkled like
     scattered leaf-gold on every object—the shadows interlaced upon the verdant grass—the yellow
     broom, glowing with its sunny hues—the groups of well-conditioned cattle ruminating on the
     meadows—and the stream, now murmuring in wild music over its rocky bed, and dimpling into
     smiles beneath the sunshine, while the mind and conversation of Mr. Granville travelled into
     the highest regions of thought, and Marion compared the bright gay aspect of all around to her
     own happy feelings.
"It is a pleasure to think," said Marion with animation, "that the poorest and most destitute
     of human beings might enjoy the beauties of nature as we do now, and all the pleasures, too, of
     confidence and affection, if they but knew how to value them. God gives all that is most
     precious to his creatures in common; and how little of our real happiness in life is derived
     from the mere vulgar display of wealth, equipages, jewels, and external splendor. It is not the
     materials of our happiness which are so important, as the way in which we build up the
     fabric."
"I have sometimes been ready to regret," answered Mr. Granville, "that in offering you my
     hand and fortune, I offer you so little; but I never desired wealth for myself. No man living
     cares less for luxury; and we may trust that my devoted affection shall succeed in shielding
     you from the thousand inconveniencies of a very limited income."
"It is the heart I value," whispered Marion. "With all my faults, the love of money never was
     one. We shall be rich in happiness, and in all that Providence gives to the most favored of
     those who trust in Him."
"Yes! such mutual confidence as ours, with Christian contentment and cheerfulness, are the
     real elixir of happiness," replied Mr. Granville. "It is by closing our eyes against the pure
     enjoyments prepared for us by the God of nature, and opening them to the artificial wants
     invented by man, that we lose all the simplicity, and most of the real felicity of life. One
     can scarcely wonder, in a scene like this, that many Christians think this beautiful earth, in
     a purified state, shall hereafter become the place of our eternal happiness; but wherever the
     presence of God is, that, and that only will constitute heaven."
"And who could wish for more?" said Marion. "That should in itself excite all our gratitude
     and joy."
"Yet this noisy turbulent stream, rushing wildly past in its angry career, is like the
     troubled course of human wishes, thoughts, and speculations, with which we are continually
     disturbing that calm, unruffled state, in which our minds would best reflect the light of
     heaven," answered Mr. Granville. "No one ever had a plummet long enough to measure the depth of
     that love to man, which has placed us as probationers in our sin-blighted world; and even if we
     had no futurity of glory promised us, and were finally to perish at death, we have cause to be
     thankful for seeing so much natural beauty, and so much intellectual enjoyment, while permitted
     to remain here."
"Yes!" replied Marion, "considering that we have forfeited every blessing, I think any man
     who has enjoyed life as he ought to, might give a receipt in full, as having received a
     thousand mercies to which he had no claim."
"But who can imagine the magnificent expansion of mind hereafter, when the whole scheme of
     nature, of providence, and of grace, shall be fully revealed, and our capacities enlarged, to
     comprehend and appreciate the mighty plan," continued Mr. Granville. "Now, even the wisest and
     best of Christians must be satisfied with the intelligent ignorance of knowing that he knows
     nothing; for even angels, travelling on the wings of thought for thousands of years, cannot yet
     understand the whole counsel of God; but our present business is to study and practise here the
     temper and manners of that celestial city in which we hope hereafter to reside, that our
     attachment, begun indeed now upon earth, may be blessed and perpetuated throughout
     eternity."
C'est bien d'etre avec les gens qu'on aime—leur parler, ne leur parler
      pas. The eye of Mr. Granville now gazed in delighted admiration on the whole
     circumference of earth and sky, with a keen perception of their beauties, and an intelligent
     recollection that while the eternal sky and the decaying earth form an apt emblem of soul and
     body, all the works of nature may be brought beautifully to exemplify the works of grace.
     Marion and he long stood still together in that companionable silence, which became so soothing
     and delightful to their spirits, that neither seemed willing to break the spell.
Both Marion and Mr. Granville delighted in devoutly contemplating the glories of
     creation—nature's system of divinity—those "elder Scriptures writ by God's own hand"—the
     majestic display of Almighty wisdom, power, and goodness, in the grand theatre of human life,
     as well as in the minutest events of their own existence.

This is religion—not unreal dreams,
Enthusiastic raptures, and seraphic gleams;
But Faith's calm triumph—Reason's steady sway—
Not the bright lightning but the perfect day.

Thus musing together, in silent, speechless happiness, Mr. Granville was suddenly roused, by
     observing a young lady approach with agitated and disordered steps, leaning on the arm of a
     more elderly female, and walking at a pace of such unusual rapidity, that it almost amounted to
     running. They both glanced frequently and hurriedly behind, as if under great alarm, while so
     remarkable an expression of terror was evident in all their looks and movements, that Mr.
     Granville, without a moment's hesitation, stepped forward, and courteously volunteered his
     services, while Marion with delighted astonishment, recognised her friend and companion,
     Caroline Smythe.
"You seem alarmed! Allow me to offer my assistance!" said Mr. Granville. "Shall we accompany
     you?"
"No! no! I am safest alone!" gasped the younger lady, in accents of wild alarm. "He carries
     pistols! He is perfectly insane! Stop him if you can! Oh! stop him! Do not let him follow!
     Direct him wrong! Do anything! Try, if you possibly can, to detain him!"
Mr. Granville glanced swiftly round, and observed, with surprise, not far from the bridge,
     and turning the sharp corner of a projecting rock, the figure of a tall, powerful young man, of
     rather gentleman-like appearance, wrapped up to the chin in a large cloak, who instantly, on
     perceiving strangers, muffled his face closely in his handkerchief, and drew down his hat, but
     approached with rapid strides and violent gesticulations, apparently speaking to himself, and
     muttering curses with terrifying vehemence. Not a moment was lost in hesitation, before Marion
     assisted the elder lady in supporting Caroline onwards, who evidently suffered under a mortal
     terror, while they rapidly dragged her across the fragile bridge, on which Marion and Richard
     had so lately enjoyed some brief and happy moments.
Mr. Granville, in the mean time, approached the stranger so as to stand directly in his path,
     and necessarily to impede his progress, while he steadily fixed his gaze upon the blazing eye
     of the madman with a calm and commanding look, which testified an unflinching determination to
     obstruct his onward career, and a steady resolution not to be intimidated by the air of
     scowling defiance with which he was met.
"Stand back!" exclaimed the stranger, in a tone of maniacal fury. "Life and death are at
     stake! stand back! delay me one moment, and you die!"
"Is the bridge secure?" asked Mr. Granville, catching hold of the madman's arm when he was
     rushing past, and instantly stooping down as if to examine the foundation, when, by a powerful
     effort of strength, he suddenly hurled the whole fabric into the eddying stream, which washed
     the shattered fragments in a moment out of sight.
With a cry of almost fiendish rage, and setting his teeth till it seemed as if they would be
     ground to powder, the maniac sprang like a tiger on Mr. Granville, and would have collared him;
     but with great agility he eluded the madman's grasp, and fixed his eyes with an expression of
     stern resolution upon his frantic antagonist, till his face cowered beneath that steady gaze,
     when he said in a calm, slow, resolute accent,
"Those ladies shall pass on unmolested. It is base and cowardly to terrify timid females whom
     we are bound with our very lives to protect. Go back as you came, and beware of touching them
     or me."
A wild and hideous laugh was the maniac's only reply, and his eyes gleamed more and more
     fiercely, while he gnawed his lip with rage, but at length suddenly bursting with irresistible
     fury past Mr. Granville, he took a long, quick run to where the bridge had formerly stood, and
     instantly, with a single bound of marvellous agility, leaped across. Richard Granville was for
     half a moment bewildered with astonishment at this unexpected achievement, and saw with
     consternation and dismay that it would be vain to attempt impeding the infuriated maniac, who
     turned a deaf ear to his loudly vociferated remonstrance, and deliberately fired a pistol in
     the air, while he held up another in a menacing attitude towards Mr. Granville, and then
     replacing the deadly weapon in his breast, he hastily disappeared along the same path which had
     been so recently pursued by the ladies.
Richard, heedless of any danger to himself, became now most seriously alarmed for the safety
     of Marion and her companions, therefore he delayed not an instant to scramble across the stream
     where it was fordable, and to follow at his utmost speed. In the impetuosity of Mr. Granville's
     career, the ground receded beneath his feet, and as he rushed onward a band of iron seemed to
     restrain his breath, for the road became steeper and more solitary, while long grass and weeds
     had grown over the wheel tracks, and the way was impeded by wild straggling hedges, which threw
     their sprays of brier and thorn almost entirely across the way. At length meeting a couple of
     countrymen, he hurriedly explained his apprehensions, when they mentioned having met a strange,
     wild-looking man, proceeding with long strides in an opposite direction. To Mr. Granville's
     great relief, however, they seemed to think that no ladies could have gone in that way, and
     after prevailing on the two laborers, with a bribe, to assist him in capturing the maniac, he
     resolutely and fearlessly pursued his course.
Marion, meantime, had accompanied the two ladies in their most unexpected flight through the
     forest, at a pace which precluded the possibility of speaking, except that now and then an
     ejaculation of terror, or an expression of fervent thankfulness was wrung from them when they
     glanced around, giving a fearful idea of instant danger. Caroline's pallid lips were parted,
     her eyes straining forward with impatient apprehension, and every limb nerved for exertion,
     while she silently pursued her way, though her feet seemed to herself as if they had become
     lead, in her vehement efforts to fly onwards; and the countenance of her aunt expressed
     scarcely less terror.
Without speaking, Marion did all in her power to accelerate their progress, but at length
     Caroline's footsteps faltered, her eye became dim, and she staggered back, faint with fatigue,
     seeing which Marion silently pointed to a large empty barn which stood beside the road, and
     having supported her within the door, Caroline fell helplessly on the floor, covering her face
     with her hands, and trembling visibly in every limb.
Marion brought water, rubbed Caroline's temples, and tried by every means to soothe her with
     the hope of being safe, but in vain—her tongue grew parched, her eyes became glassy, her
     features almost livid, and she faintly pointed towards the door, which Marion barricaded to the
     best of her ability. Caroline threw herself back on a heap of straw, and covered her face with
     her hands in a helpless agony of fear. Several minutes afterwards elapsed in breathless silence
     on the part of Marion and Mrs. Smythe, when Caroline at length started up, eager to pursue her
     course towards the nearest village, now scarcely a mile off, while her companions earnestly
     entreated her to rest rather, and compose herself.
"He has lost the track! he cannot be following us now," said Marion, in accents of trembling
     alarm, the agitated tone of which belied her words, while an icy chill had crept through her
     veins. "Let us rest here, we are safe now! He will hurry past! He will not think of searching
     for us in this place!"
"He will! he will! when the fit is on nothing escapes him," replied Caroline, who felt a
     choking sensation in her throat which impeded her utterance. "Oh! think of the fearful past!
     that dreadful night when he first became insane! Why did I believe him when he promised never
     to terrify me more! a horrid dread is upon me! a strange ringing in my ears! a weight of lead
     upon my heart!"
"How wonderful that he never can be traced! that he always finds us out! that if there ever
     be a moment when we feel peculiarly safe from his presence, he comes!" whispered Mrs. Smythe,
     in an under tone, as if afraid that the very walls might re-echo her words. "We must leave this
     neighborhood, we must take new precautions till he can be found and shut up."
Before Caroline could utter the affirmative, which trembled on her lips, her eyes became
     stony with a look of sudden fear, her hands were faintly clasped together, her parched and
     livid lips were parted, and with a half uttered shriek she threw herself behind Marion,
     riveting her arms closely round her waist, when, the next minute, a window of the barn was
     dashed in with a violence which nothing could resist, and the maniac, giving a wild cry of
     malignant triumph, began to clamber in, clinging to the window-sill with his long bony fingers,
     while concealing his face, so that nothing could be seen but his eyes, which burned like living
     coals.
"You have deceived me once, but you shall deceive me no more!" said he, in hoarse, deep
     accents, and with a ghastly look, while the terrified girl seemed to wither beneath his glance.
     "I cannot breathe while you live! I have shed blood before now, and none can tell who did it!
     You may call, but there are none to help—you may weep, but I cannot pity—you may fly, but there
     is no escape! My heart is turned to stone! My blood is liquid fire! Strange figures are
     gibbering behind me! Unearthly voices are whispering in my ear! I will do it! Yes! when I stand
     on the scaffold to be executed I shall not be nearer death than you are at this moment."
Marion, conscious that the madman's fury was not directed at herself, and feeling the courage
     which arises from desperation, resolved, at whatever cost, at least to delay, if possible, any
     catastrophe which she might not be able finally to prevent, and anxious, even for an instant,
     to take the maniac's eye off the trembling girl beside her, she now walked resolutely forward
     to the window, though trembling as much as if she were about to throw herself beside a wild
     beast in his cage. Her teeth chattered with terror, and the words seemed to stiffen in her
     throat as she uttered them, but still she persevered, saying in a gentle, soothing accent:
"You are a gentleman, and cannot want money! What would you have? Who has injured you? Tell
     me why you pursue us? Think for one moment how many years you have to live, and how miserable
     you may be for ever, if you do a rash act now! Pause and consider, for the curse of God and man
     will be upon you!"
The madman gazed for an instant at the pale countenance of Marion, every feature in which
     quivered with emotion; he seemed almost ashamed of his own fearful violence, and was about, in
     a calmer tone, to reply, when the barn door was suddenly burst open by the two countrymen, who
     entered with Mr. Granville.
"He shall die!" muttered the maniac between his clenched teeth, "Both! all! all! The power of
     life and death is here!"
Marion heard a sound of terror close beside her—it was a click, as of a pistol being cocked,
     the muzzle of which was directed towards Mr. Granville, while the maniac deliberately took his
     aim; but with a sudden impulse of desperation, she threw her arm upwards, and struck the fatal
     weapon, which instantly went off with a report that stunned her senses.
Nearly blinded by the shock, Marion staggered backwards as if about to fall, yet strained her
     eyes, in speechless agony, to ascertain if Mr. Granville were saved. There was blood upon his
     cheek, but he rushed forward at once, and pinioned the madman's arms within his own, while the
     two countrymen assisted; and after a severe scuttle, the maniac, perfectly mastered, lay
     panting on the floor, while he glared on Mr. Granville with a frown of baffled malignity,
     uttering execrations both loud and deep, so dreadful to hear, that Marion's heart quailed
     within her at their awful import, though unable to look round, while occupied in applying
     restoratives to Caroline, who had sunk, with a heavy groan, perfectly insensible on the
     floor.
After more than ten minutes, during which not a pulse could be felt, Caroline was carried
     into the air by Mr. Granville, when the wind, playing on her cheek, brought on a gradual
     restoration to life—a slight fluttering was perceived at her heart, a faint color tinged her
     cheek, and with a deep-drawn sigh and a bewildered look, she suddenly started up, as if about
     to renew her flight.
"Dear Caroline!" said Marion, calmly, "all is safe! Do not agitate yourself. We have had,
     indeed, a wonderful escape."
Miss Smythe embraced Marion in a transport of joy and gratitude, after which she turned to
     Mr. Granville, uttering the warmest expression of her thanks, while he, with an evident desire
     to conclude a discussion obviously so agitating to the two ladies, proposed, after amply
     remunerating the two countrymen, his assistants, to hurry forward and send conveyances from the
     neighboring inn. With one anxious look at the pale, exhausted countenance of Marion, Mr.
     Granville hastily disappeared, meditating, as he hastened along, with deep interest on his
     recent adventure, and with pleasing emotion on the happy eclaircissement
     which had that morning taken place with Marion, binding them to each other by the strong ties
     of honor, principle, and affection.
Half an hour afterwards, Richard returned with two carriages, in one of which he placed the
     ladies, whom he met advancing along the road; but after proceeding forward with the other, to
     secure his prisoner, he was startled and astonished to discover that the maniac and his two
     keepers had entirely disappeared.
