
CHAPTER X.
The Squire sat making calculations in his study, as he did nearly every day of his life.
     There was nothing in his appearance to denote that anything unusual, least of all anything
     exceedingly pleasant, had occurred to him. And yet, it was only that morning that they had told
     him Jack was alive and was coming home the same evening. Perhaps it was that, like Digby, he
     found it hard to revive an affection that had ceased to be part of his life six months ago; or,
     more likely still, he felt in some vague way or another that Jack had come back to life on
     purpose to produce some unpaid debts for his father to settle. Sir Marcus never dissimulated,
     and he made no attempt to conceal the fact that his joy in his son's resurrection did not
     wholly compensate for the trouble that was certain to be a consequence of it.
So he sat making calculations as usual, though his wife felt bound to go into hysterics in
     the drawing-room, and the rest of the family were trying to erect a shaky evergreen arch in the
     garden, with "Welcome home!" nailed on it in evergreen letters. They were making a good deal of
     noise over it, too, and the calculations did not get on, in consequence. They related this time
     to rabbits, to the number imported yearly from abroad, and the inadequate number reared in the
     home country itself, and Sir Marcus was making them with the object of writing a letter to the
     county paper, suggesting rabbit culture as a lucrative employment for the British villager.
     According to Sir Marcus, the British villager had an immense amount of time on his hands. Not
     that his interest in the duck culture was in any degree on the wane, but the county paper had
     refused to insert any more of his letters about the Murville ducks and the enormous profits
     that the Murville laborer was said to realize from breeding them; and so the Squire had been
     only too glad to take up the question of tame rabbits, which was being tentatively ventilated
     by a neighboring Squire in another village. Sir Marcus never did anything tentatively, however;
     so he began by talking rabbits at every man he met in the village street; and as every man he
     met, owing to his own former persuasions, was a ducker, that worthy generally received his
     recommendation of this new animal with something like distrust. The duckers of Murville could
     not understand any article of commerce that did not lay eggs, and although they obediently ate
     the few samples that the Squire sent round to them for their Sunday dinners, yet they did so
     with much condescension, and no little suspicion that they were being coaxed into liking a new
     food that must be inferior because it was cheap. The Murville laborer had retained some of his
     independence, in spite of being the property of a Radical overlord.
"Tell ye what it is, George," said Tom Clarke, the biggest ducker in the village, as he sat
     smoking one evening in the newly built club in the main street, "I be altogether flustered
     along o' them new fancies of the Squire, I be. What be rabbits, hey, man? Can ye tell me that,
     now? Ye be oop at the Manor all day, along o' the Squire hisself, so ye ought to know for
     sure."
The handy man shook his head dumbly, which was his usual form of reply, and the one that his
     hearers generally preferred; and Tom Clarke continued his ruminations for the benefit of any of
     the members present who might be inclined to listen to him.
"Rabbits beats me altogether, I be bound to own. They bain't poultry, and they bain't
     butcher's meat neither. What be they, anyhow? The Squire be a proper kind gentleman for sure,
     but when he takes up with them okkard new fancies what no one can't explain, it be proper hard
     to know how to treat 'un. Why, George man, when the parson was readin' of the Litany, Sunday
     past, and come to the 'kindly fruits of the earth,' I thinks to myself, 'that's rabbits, that
     is,' and I shuts my mouth tight, I does! And me what's never missed sayin' and singin' all the
     prayer-book allows 'un to do, this forty year that I've sat in the choir up agin poor Jack
     Priest's tablet. 'T ain't as though I be an unreligious body what sings an' don't pray, as I've
     known some do; but there's never a Amen that I don't take part in, and there bain't a trap in
     the service as can catch me now, allays allowin' for the reply to the tenth commandment what
     were put in by the devil or the chapel people, and caught on by the parsons accidental, so to
     speak. So you see how a man be upset all along o' them beasts, if ye can call a thing a beast
     what eats like string."
Mrs. Tom Clarke, in spite of the cookery lectures that had been given in the Club on
     Wednesday evenings, by an expert from London, who had evolved strange dishes from herring heads
     and mutton bones with the aid of a patent portable stove, still preferred to cook her husband's
     food in her own way, and this generally consisted in putting it into a saucepan from which the
     duck's food had just been extracted,—a process which had the effect of making everything taste
     alike; so it was certainly probable that the Squire's rabbit had not had a fair chance in that
     cottage, at all events.
But in spite of the opposition he was receiving from his most faithful adherents, Sir Marcus
     still sat patiently, and made his calculations for his new letter to the papers. He had already
     written to two or three members of Parliament for statistics, and had received replies from the
     House of Commons which he folded on his writing-table with the address uppermost, and in which
     they mostly referred him to Whitaker; and he had caused a slight disruption at the luncheon
     table, only that day, by wanting to know the good of the expensive education he had given his
     children if it turned them out ignorant of rabbits. The children were wishing just then that
     their father's new hobby had not happened to possess him in the Christmas holidays, and Lady
     Raleigh had taken the precaution of telling her cook to jug the hare and make it as unlike a
     rabbit as possible, so that dinner might pass off more peaceably than luncheon had done.
"I must have Joan down; she would sympathize," murmured Sir Marcus, laying his pen
     down, and reading the first sentences he had written of his letter. "Splendid woman, Joan,
     never laughs at my little ideas, and takes such an interest in them. Shows what intelligence
     can do for a girl. She'd have made Jack realize the responsibilities of existence, she would.
     Devil take my head, why is it swimming so this afternoon?"
The letter did not get on very fast, there was too much similarity between its sentiments and
     those he had so often expressed before; it looked rather as though he were adapting an old
     letter by scratching out "duck" and substituting "rabbit," for he found himself writing that
     the feathers and eggs alone of one rabbit more than repaid the cost of rearing it.
"Digby used to come down and see me oftener than he does now," said Sir Marcus, laying down
     his pen again and passing his hand across his brow. "I don't like his being away so long, and
     the dear little boy too; why don't they come and see me? Got a wife? Oh, to be sure, yes; my
     memory don't seem so strong as it was, somehow: to be sure, a wife, yes. Nice little thing,
     very; wonder if she would know how many we get yearly from Holland? My hand gets more tired
     than it used, though it wouldn't do to say so; people are so ready to talk about an old man
     breaking up before he's out of the sixties. Why, I walked up from the post-office in eight
     minutes and a half this morning; I can beat the youngsters now, eh? I wish Joan would come and
     catch hold of this accursed letter, it keeps drifting so far away. I always wonder what made
     her take Digby; funny fellow, Digby. What am I saying? It's Jack who is her husband, isn't it?
     I've been writing too much to-day, that's what it is. I'm only a little queer, but—I wish Joan
     would come and finish my letter for me. Why won't Digby bring her down now? Let's get hold of
     the whiskey; that's what I want to set me straight, of course. What nonsense they are talking;
     men don't fall to pieces when they are sixty-four. I can walk with the best of them, eh, Joan,
     my dear?"
There were three people destined for Murville Manor in the 6.45 from Euston that evening. Two
     of them were in separate third-class smoking carriages at the end of the train; the other sat
     in a first-class compartment. They were Digby, and Jack, and Lady Joan, all summoned by the
     same telegram, and all obeying the summons unknown to each other, and with the greatest speed
     possible. The two brothers, singularly enough, each spent the greater part of the two hours'
     journey in reading and re-reading a letter, which was written, in both cases, in a thick,
     rather illegible handwriting. The musician, as he took his from the already opened envelope,
     gave a half-conscious look round the carriage before he read it. It dated from the day before,
     and had no heading to it:—
"I think on consideration that the new form of diversion you proposed to me the other
      night would not work so well as we thought. So I am not going to entertain it any longer. You
      will probably blame me for my vacillation; but then, you should not have established a
      precedent for vacillation in the 'Relton Arms,' four years ago. After all, there is nothing
      left but the book; and I am going to be away, and alone, until I have written it. Don't be
      alarmed. I am not going to soak it with my own experiences."Joan."
His younger brother, in the other carriage, did not look at any one when he took his letter
     from his breast-pocket and unfolded it. It was very limp, and looked as though it had been
     unfolded many times before. It was dated two days earlier:—
"My dear Boy,—I am a cad, and I hate myself for what I have done to you. It
      is quite the meanest thing I have done in my life. Please believe that I did not authorize
      Digby to come and tell you for me, last night; he wanted to spare me the unpleasantness, I
      suppose, of confessing to you that I was a brute. But I am a brute, all the same; I should
      only be a worse one if I were to marry you now. I haven't the least right to expect you to
      grant me a favor, but I shall be glad if you will take this as final."Joan
       Relton."
The station for Murville village was two miles away from the Manor House, or from any human
     habitation of importance; and as the train slowly steamed away from it to-night, the three
     passengers whom it had brought from town, unknown to each other, were the only three whom it
     had deposited on the platform. They found themselves standing together near the exit, and there
     was an awkward moment of recognition while they fumbled with cold fingers for their tickets.
     Digby had apparently lost his altogether; Lady Joan had hers ready, and passed out swiftly; and
     Jack promptly gave up the wrong half of his and passed out after her, in spite of the
     station-master's expostulations.
"Stupid of George to be late," observed Jack in the road outside. He was clearing his throat
     a good deal, and looking up the road with a great show of concern.
"It was odd that we should all catch the same train," she said, stamping her feet, and
     coughing with unnecessary violence; "I suppose you have not been down before?"
"No; they only knew of my arrival in time to cable to me that my father was dying," he said,
     with a queer mixture of humor and bitterness; "life is very rum sometimes, isn't it?"
"Always," she said fervently, and shivered among her furs. They both looked up the road then,
     and prayed for the advent of George and the cart. Digby's irritated tones could be heard from
     within, concerning his missing ticket.
"I say, won't you let fly for the fire in the booking-office till George comes? I reckon
     you're cold some," began Jack again, awkwardly.
"Oh, no, please don't trouble about me," she replied politely, as though she had just been
     introduced to him for the first time.
Digby came out and joined them.
"He's always late," he began, in a high-pitched tone, also looking up the road with a great
     show of interest.
"He is a countryman, you see," said Lady Joan, with gravity.
"And the mother has been at him for six years," added Jack.
They discussed the handy man, without a suspicion of a smile, for some minutes longer, and
     they continued to look up the road, and back at the clock in the station, and anywhere except
     at each other, until the welcome sound of wheels at last drew near, when they all flung
     themselves upon the handy man, without mercy, and robbed him of his few wits at once.
"How is your master, George?"
"Yes, how is Sir Marcus, George?" added Joan, anxiously.
"Aye, how be the Squire, for sure, poor gentleman?" chimed in the solitary porter from
     behind.
"And what on earth possessed you to bring the luggage cart, George?" added Digby,
     wrathfully.
The handy man slowly dismounted from his seat, and made a desperate effort to say what was
     required of him.
"He be proper bad, he be; leastways so the cook told me when I come by the larder window with
     the sprouts, or I should say the celery for dinner it was, an' Lady Raleigh, she would have it
     as it were too slippy to bring the dog-cart, notwithstandin' as it bain't the cart what falls
     down, but the animal for sure, an' he won't last till mornin', poor gentleman, though the best
     London doctor come down by the five-forty o' purpose to have a last look of him, what went far
     towards killin' of 'im off in my thinkin'. An' the luggage is to be sent on afterwards, if ye
     please, Mr. Jack; an' Tom Clarke he says as how he means to put off his visit to his sister,
     what's married into the grocery business at Reading, till he be sure how things means to turn
     out, cos he says he bain't a-goin' of to miss a choreal funeral, what hasn't been for nigh upon
     thirty—"
"Go to the horse's head, George," said Digby, sternly, and he turned to hand Lady Joan into
     the cart; "it is not very comfortable, I am afraid, but Jack and I will walk on, which will
     give you more room."
Lady Joan drew back and hesitated a little.
"You had better come too, hadn't you?" she said; "it would be much quicker, and—"
"Aye, sir, there be room and to spare," put in the porter, encouragingly; "you've only got to
     put your arms round one another all tidy an' comfortable like, an' there ain't no fear o'
     tumbling out. Bless ye, sir, there be as many as six together in a cart like this on market
     days, all as safe and as pleasant as can be."
"An' there bain't no time to lose, Mr. Digby," added George, from the horse's head;
     "leastways, the end might come while we be gossipin' here, and the Lord grant him a
     peaceful—"
"Come and take the reins, George," interrupted Lady Joan, suddenly mounting the cart without
     any assistance at all, "and get in quickly, you two; there's loads of room, of course."
They began by sitting stiffly on the edge of the seat, as far away from each other as
     possible; but the first plunge forward of the restive pony nearly tipped up the seat and sent
     them all backwards, and a parting admonition from the friendly porter followed them up the
     road.
"Hold on tight to the lady, sirs; that be the only way of doin' it," he bawled at the top of
     his voice; and although it was an attitude that none of the three would have chosen at that
     moment, they were compelled by common prudence to follow his advice; and they completed the
     drive in silence, sitting on the narrow seat of the little rickety cart, with their arms locked
     together, and their hands unavoidably clasped.
The Squire's letter to the papers was never finished, and nobody ever told him how many
     rabbits were imported annually from Holland. It was a question he repeatedly asked of those
     around him on the last night of his life, though he varied it, when Joan and his two sons
     arrived, by wanting to know when Jack was going to be married.
"Soon, quite soon," Lady Joan whispered to him reassuringly, and she put her hand in Jack's
     to confirm the delusion. Jack knew it was a delusion, and did not press it; he had come to
     understand her at last.
They stood together in the library, a week after the Squire's death, on the eve of her
     departure for Relton.
"I was a fool ever to think you could care for me," he said sadly. The circumstances of the
     week they had spent together, since their meeting at the station, had completely dissipated
     their first feelings of awkwardness. They were almost on the dull footing of a brother and
     sister, who have very little in common, but who have learnt the trick of companionship.
"I let you think I did. It was my fault, as I told you before. Hadn't we better let it drop?"
     she said brusquely. "Oh, heavens! how old I am beginning to look," she added, as she caught a
     glimpse of herself in the glass over the mantelshelf.
"It is only because you are tired," he said, looking at her.
She laughed.
"At least you are truthful," she said, carelessly; "tell me you are not wild with me, Jack. I
     have treated you abominably, haven't I? If only you were not so provokingly good-tempered about
     it, I should feel much better, I think. I always did hate whipping a dog that didn't howl. Ah,
     you don't understand a bit! I believe I am rotten all through, and that is why I have dished my
     life so effectually. And I'm not a bit sorry, and I mean to have a good time still. Hey-day!
     But tell me you're not wild, Jack."
"Oh, that's all straight now. And it's much worse for you, don't you know," he said,
     stumbling on the truth in his slow way; "I shall do all right; don't you fret yourself about
     me. I ought to have known I shouldn't do for you. Digby will take you to the station, eh?"
"I am going alone," she answered abruptly, and went out into the porch, where most of the
     family had come to see her off. Owing to some mismanagement on the part of the handy man, who,
     having been the most important man in the village since the Squire's death and funeral, had
     completely neglected his usual work ever since, the pony needed shoeing on this particular
     afternoon, and Lady Joan could not be driven to the station in consequence. She persisted in
     her determination to walk alone, and Digby remained in awkward silence while his escort was
     being freely pressed upon her by his unconscious relations. Poor Lady Raleigh, more
     inconsequent than ever in the midst of her grief, kissed her convulsively, and poured out a
     confused medley of entreaties into her ear.
"You won't take anything to heart, dear, that Jack has said to you? He doesn't mean anything
     he says, you know, so you must believe him when he says he loves you as much as ever. He tells
     me it is all right, so I am not going to say anything about it; but of course you'll look on
     this as your home until he marries you, won't you, dear? And I assure you Jack cannot bear to
     be away from you a single hour, but he does like to stay in his home best, so you won't think
     anything of his not walking to the station with you. Of course Digby is only too pleased to go
     with you, and all the fields about here are crowded with dangerous bulls, and if you are not
     quick you will lose the train, and they never keep it for you at these country stations, you
     know. So you must have Digby, of course. And you are sure you understand about dear Jack? You
     mustn't listen to him, that's all; he says he is so fond of you still, dear boy."
"Do have Digby, Joan; he doesn't leave till to-morrow, and he only hangs about the place
     doing nothing, and it will take him out for an hour." This from Helen.
"I am sorry to disappoint everybody," said Lady Joan, in her clearest, most composed tones;
     "but if I did lose the train, Digby would not be of the least use to me in producing another
     one; and I'm afraid I am not nearly unselfish enough to burden myself with his company for the
     good of the community; so good-bye, sir;" and she gave him a straight look out of her eyes as
     she held out her hand. It was the first time she had spoken directly to him since they had
     parted that night in Pont Street, and he avoided her eyes.
"Good-bye. They seem very anxious to burden you with my presence, don't they?" he said, with
     a forced laugh; "all luck to the book."
"Thanks. I will send it to you in instalments for criticism."
He was the last to remain in the porch, watching her across the fields; and there was not a
     criminal in the kingdom with whom he would not gladly have changed places at that moment.
"I shall go up to-night, I think, and surprise Norah," he muttered presently. There was a
     dull consolation in the idea of meeting the woman who had acquired the habit of being glad to
     see him; and he felt a little better when he packed his bag upstairs.
The baby was in bed when he walked into the flat, and Norah was having her solitary meal in
     the dining-room.
"Why are you here to-night?" she asked him, as he held her to him more closely than usual.
     There was a gleam in the eyes he had almost despised lately for not being more observant, but
     he did not notice it as he kissed her softly. "So Joan went away to-day, did she?" she
     added.
"Joan? Did she write to you?" he asked quickly.
"Oh, no. But I knew," and she nodded at him.
"How did you know, wise woman?" he said playfully.
"Because you have come home, of course," she replied, and laughed outright. He laughed too;
     but there was not a pleasant ring in his merriment and it was short-lived.
"What has come over you, childie?" he said, beginning to feel vaguely alarmed.
She had disengaged herself from his arms, and was walking away to the window.
"Oh, nothing. Only it is a pity you leave your coats about. I should never have known if you
     had not been so careless. At least, I fancy I have known all the winter," she added dreamily,
     as if to herself.
"Known what?" he asked in a voice he did not seem to recognize. But he knew; and he felt
     rather worse than when he had stood in the porch that afternoon, watching Joan over the fields.
     "What a hellish sport marriage is!" he added in a bitter undertone.
She heard him, and came back to his side.
"Digby."
"Well? I don't want you to touch me, if you would rather not," he said roughly, and did not
     look at her.
"I want to tell you," she went on softly. "I found Joan's letter, and I read it as a matter
     of course; I thought it was about—oh, never mind what. That was the day you went down to
     Murville; and I could not speak to you then. It has been so dreadful waiting for you to come
     back, Digby. Are you not going to look at me, now you have come?"
He turned round bewildered, and saw her eyes full of tears.
"Good God, Norah, do you mean you can know that, and—?"
"Yes, dear. I think I know more than you. I think I know how you have been feeling lately,
     and all the winter. But I did not know it was as bad as this, and when I read that letter—do
     you know how I felt? I think I must tell you, Digby; I have had something to bear too, you
     know. I felt first that something terrible had come between you and me, something that wanted
     pushing away with all my might; and I couldn't do it alone, Digby, and you—you were not there
     to help me. And then—I only felt sorry for you. I have just longed for you to come back that I
     might put my arms round you and comfort you, and tell you that I knew. Digby, don't turn away
     like that."
"But—it is inconceivable—do you know what you are saying? Do you know that if that letter had
     not been written, I should have—?" He paused, for he could not bring himself to finish the
     sentence. But she sprang away from him suddenly, and stood in front of him in the middle of the
     room, with her hands clasped at the back of her head, and a blaze of triumph in her eyes.
"No, no, not that!" she cried; "never that! I knew it could not be. If I had thought you
     capable of that, should I be speaking to you now like this? Do you think women are such fools
     then? I know, she knew—that you were not capable of it, that you never meant
     it, that it was one of your queer impulses that make me love you so madly, and that she can
     never forgive in you. That is why she wrote you that letter. That is why you
     are mine now, mine, mine, mine!"
The musician fell in love more thoroughly that afternoon than he had ever fallen in love
     before.
He fell in love with his own wife.
"We must have Joan up to stay with us; she could write nicely at the table in the
     dining-room, couldn't she?" said Norah, when they began to talk rationally again. They felt
     wonderfully fond of Joan this evening.
"Oh, do you think so? I fancy she'll be all right down at Relton for the present," he
     answered. He was feeling that he could do with his wife for a good long time now.
"It's just as you like, dear. And do you know, baby is so wonderfully good now she has nearly
     all her teeth, that I believe you would find the study quiet enough to write music in. It has
     been very uncomfortable for you lately, hasn't it?" said she.
"Oh, it's been all right. And I don't think I want to write music much. I say, do you think
     baby will take to me now?" said he.
Then she laughed, and he demanded the reason of her merriment.
"I was thinking how Joan once said that I should never be able to understand your nature, and
     that you would be wounding me half-a-dozen times a day," she explained, and laughed again.
"How absurd of her," he cried, and roared with laughter himself; "but then you know, childie,
     Joan has always been possessed with the idea that we were not born for each other."
"Could anything be more ridiculous?" said Norah; and they broke into a fresh peal of
     laughter, without any apparent reason for it.
A distant wail from the nursery summoned her presently, and Digby was left alone in the
     dining-room. He smoked two cigarettes in silence, with a complacent smile, and he delivered
     himself of his favorite exclamation as he rolled up a third.
"Good heavens!" he said out loud; "if it were not for habit what chance would there be for
     marriage? Next time I see Joan, I'll—"
But there he stopped.
THE END.
