
CHAPTER X.
STORY OF EDGAR VAUGHAN.
Child Clara, for your own dear sake, as well as mine and my sweet love's,
                            I will not dwell on that tempestuous time. If you cannot comprehend it
                            without words, no words will enable you. If you can, and I fear you do,
                            no more words are wanted; and, as an old man weary of the world, I know
                            not whether to envy or to pity you.
Hither and thither I was flung, to the zenith star of ecstasy or the
                            nadir gulf of agony, according as my idol pet chose to smile or frown.
                            Though she was no silly child, but a girl of mind and feeling, she had a
                            store, I must confess, of clouds as well as dazzling sunlight in the
                            empyrean of her eyes. Her nature, like my love, was full of Southern
                            passion. It is like the air they breathe, the beauty they behold. One
                            minute of such love compresses in a thunder flood all the slow emotions
                            stealing through the drought-scrimped channel, where we dredge for gold
                            deposits, through ten years of Saxon courtship. Instead of Lily-bloom,
                            she should have been called the Passion-flower.
My life, my soul—how weak our English words are—she loved me from the
                            first, I can take my oath she did, although her glory was too great for
                            her to own it yet, though now and then her marvellous eyes proved
                            traitors. Sometimes when she was racking me most, feigning even, with
                            those eyes cast down, her pellucid fingers point to point, and her
                            little foot tapping the orchid bloom, feigning, I say, in cold blood, to
                            reckon her noble lovers—long names all and horribly hateful to
                            me—suddenly, while I trembled, and scowled like a true-born Briton,
                            suddenly up would leap the silky drooping lashes, and a spring of soft
                            electric light would flutter through them to the very core of my
                            heart.
As for me, I abandoned myself. I made no pretence of waiting a moment. I
                            flung my heart wide open to her, and if she would not come in, desert it
                            should be for ever.
She did come. That life-blood of my soul came in, and would and could
                            live nowhere else for ever.
It was done like this. One August evening, when the sun was sinking, and
                            the air was full of warmth and wooing sounds, the cicale waking from his
                            early nap, the muffro leaping for the first dew-drop, the love-birds
                            whispering in the tamarind leaves, Fiordalisa sat with me, under a giant
                            cork-tree on the western slope. The tower was still in Vendetta siege,
                            and the grave and reverend Signor knew better than to come out, when the
                            Sbirri were gone to the town. Lily-bloom was sitting by me in a mass of
                            flowers; her light mandile was laid by, that her glorious hair might
                            catch the first waft of the evening breeze. All down her snow-white
                            shoulders fell the labyrinth of tresses, twined by me with red Tacsonia,
                            and two pale carnations. Her form was pillowed in rich fern, that
                            feathered round her waist; of all the fronds and plumes and stems, not
                            one so taper, light, and rich as that. The bloom upon her cheeks was
                            deepened by my playing with her hair, and her soft large eyes were
                            beaming with delicious wonder.
We knew, as well as He who made us, that we loved one another. None who
                            did not love for ever could interchange such looks. Suddenly, and
                            without a word, in an ecstasy of admiration, I passed my left arm round
                            her little waist, drew her close to me—she was very near before—and
                            looking full into her wondrous eyes, found no protest but a thrill of
                            light; then tried her lips and met her whole heart there. Darling, how
                            she kissed me! No English girl can do it. And then the terror of her
                            maiden thoughts. The recollection of her high-born pride, and higher
                            because God-born innocence. How she wept, and blushed, and trembled;
                            trembled, blushed, and wept again; and then vouchsafed one more
                            entrancing kiss, to atone for the unwitting treason. Even thus I would
                            not be content. I wanted words as well.
"Do you love me, my own Lily, with every atom of your heart?"
"I have not left one drop of blood for all the world besides."
And it was true. And so it was with me. I told her father that same
                            night. And now in the heaven of gladness and wild pleasure, beyond all
                            dreams of earth, opened the hell of my wickedness and crime; which but
                            for mercy and long repentance would sever me from my Lily in the world
                            to come. To some the crime may seem a light one, to me it is a most
                            atrocious sin, enhanced tenfold by its awful consequences.
By my crime, I do not mean my sinful adoration, as cold men may call it,
                            of a fellow mortal. Nature has no time to waste, and unless she meant my
                            Lily to be worshipped, she would not have lavished all her skill in
                            making her so divine. No, I mean my black deceit, in passing for my
                            brother. Oh, Clara, don't go from me.
Like many another ruinous sin, it was committed without thought, or
                            rather without deliberation. No scheme was laid, not even the least
                            intention cherished; but the moment brought it, and the temptation was
                            too great. Who could have that loving pet gazing at him so, and not sell
                            his soul almost to win her to his arms?
Laurence Daldy was a lazy ass. I do not want to shift my blame to him,
                            but merely state a fact. If he had not been a lazy ass, your father
                            would be living now—ay, and my Fiordalisa. When he chose, he could write
                            very good Italian, and a clear, round hand, and oh, rare accomplishment
                            for an officer, he could even spell. But his letter to Signor Dezio,
                            scrawled betwixt two games of pool, was a perfect magpie's nest of
                            careless zigzag, wattles, and sand slap-dash. In those days a hasty
                            writer used to flick his work with sand, which stanched but did not dry
                            the ink. The result was often a grimy dabble, like a child's face
                            blotched with blackberries.
Lily and I had quite arranged how we should present ourselves. Like two
                            children we rehearsed it under the twilight trees. "And then, you know,"
                            my sweet love whispered, "I shall give you a regular kiss beneath the
                            dear father's beard, and you will see what an effect it will have.
                            Thence he will learn, oh sweetest mine, that there is no help for it;
                            because we Corsican girls are so chary of our lips."
"Are you indeed, my beautiful Lily? I must teach you liberality, to me,
                            and to me alone."
"Sweetest mine," she always called me from the moment she confessed her
                            love; and so, no doubt, she is calling me now in heaven.
The curtain hung in heavy folds across the narrow doorway of the long
                            dark room. The hospitable board was gay with wine and dainty fruit,
                            melons, figs, and peaches, plums of golden and purple hue, pomegranates,
                            pomi d'oro, green almonds, apricots, and muscatels from the ladders of
                            Cape Corso. Through them and upon them played the mellow light from a
                            single lamp, with dancing lustres round it. All the rest of the room was
                            dark. At the head of the table sat Signor Dezio Della Croce, waiting for
                            his guest and daughter. Posted high at the end window on a ledge of
                            rough-hewn board, stood the ancient warder, who had lived for fifty
                            years among them, and whose great fusil commanded the only approach to
                            the castle.
As we entered timidly, the maiden's right hand on my neck, my left arm
                            round her ductile waist, our other hands clasped firmly, I glanced
                            toward that noxious sentinel.
"Never mind him, sweetest mine. Don't believe that he is there.
                            Grandpapa, I call him, and he knows all my secrets."
Signor Dezio looked amazed, as we glided towards him. His life had been
                            one series of crushing blows from heaven. Three brave sons had been
                            barbarously murdered in Vendetta, and his graceful loving wife had
                            broken her heart and died. The sole hope of his house, his petling
                            Fiordalisa, though she called herself a woman and was full sixteen, he
                            looked upon her still in his trouble-torn chronology, as only ripe
                            enough to be dandled on his lap. Still he called her his "Ninnina," and
                            sang nannas to her, as he had been obliged to do after her mother's
                            death.
As he sat there, too astonished to smile, or frown, or say a word, Lily
                            dropped upon her knees before him, as a Grecian maiden would. We English
                            are not supple-jointed; but for Lily's sake, I could not stand beside
                            her. Then she placed her soft right hand in the centre of my hard palm,
                            flung the other arm round my neck, and with her eyes upon her father's,
                            gave me a long affectionate kiss. This done, she drew her father's head
                            down, and kissed his snow-white beard. Now, she told me, after this, any
                            father who is obdurate, must according to institution blame himself and
                            no one else, if harm befall the maiden.
All this time, I spoke not, and thought of nothing except to screen my
                            Lily. Signor Dezio kept a stately silence, but the tears were in his
                            eyes, and the long white beard was quivering. Lily bent her head, and
                            waited for his words.
"Mother of God! My little child, what are you thinking of?"
"Only thinking of being married, father."
"And set another Vendetta afoot, and be killed yourself! Signor"—turning
                            haughtily to me—"this lady is betrothed, from her early infancy, to her
                            cousin Lepardo Della Croce."
"Oh, I hate him," cried Fiordalisa, clasping her hands piteously. "Ah,
                            Madonna, I hate him so; and thank our Lady, no one has seen him for six
                            years. He is dead no doubt in some Cannibal Island. Saints of mercy,
                            keep him. I saw it in the Spalla, in the Shepherd's Spalla, and I saw my
                            own love there, the eve before he came."
"Grace of Holy Mary! Who read the Spalla for you?"
"The hoary goatherd from Ghidazzo." And up sprang Fiordalisa, flew to an
                            inner room, and fetched from the dark niche in the wall the box of holy
                            relics. With these she knelt before her father, and placed her right
                            hand on the box.
"My child, it is not needful. I believe you without an oath. Never yet
                            have you passed the boundary of truth."
The old chief bowed his head in thought. He had lost his last surviving
                            son by neglecting the Spalla's decree. The Spalla is the shoulder blade
                            of a goat, polished, and used for divination; upon it had been read
                            Sampiero's death, and the destiny of Napoleon. The old man who had
                            forecast the latter was still alive, and of immense renown, and
                            traversed the island now like an ancient prophet. He was the hoary
                            goatherd of Ghidazzo.
Lily saw that she was conquering; she leaped upon her father's knee and
                            hugged him; and her triumph was complete. While she wept upon his
                            breast, and told him all her little tale, and whispered in his ear, and
                            while he kissed, and comforted her, and thought of her dear mother, I
                            rushed out and leaped the Vinea, and wept beneath the olive-trees.
At last the old man rose and called me, he durst not venture from the
                            door; but he did what was far better, he sent my own love after me. At
                            length when we returned, and we found cause not to hurry,—
"Signor Vogheno," he began, "I have observed you well. I am a man of very
                            keen observation"—Lily's eyes gave me a twinkle full of fun—"or I should
                            not be alive this moment. I have observed you, sir, and I approve your
                            character. I cannot say as much, sir, of all the Englishmen I have been
                            privileged to meet. There is about them very much of the nature of a
                            dog. Forgive me, sir; pray interrupt me not. I only judge by what I have
                            seen. God forbid that I should say so to you, while you were my guest.
                            Now you are one of my family, and entitled to the result of my
                            observations. Of the little island itself I know nothing at all, though
                            I am informed that its institutions are of a barbarous character."
"Vendetta for instance," was on my lips, but Lily's glance just saved it.
                            And I thought of his three brave sons.
"But, Signor beloved, you are different from them; indeed you have the
                            nobility of the Corsican nature. And what is most of all, my little
                            child has fixed her heart upon you. But she is very young, sir, quite a
                            child you see." I saw nothing of the sort, but a blooming maiden figure,
                            growing lovelier every day. Poor Lily dropped her long eyelashes, and
                            smiled through a glowing blush. So blushed Lavinia under the eyes of
                            Turnus.
"This darling child is now the heiress to these lands of mine. And if her
                            cousin Lepardo, whose death she has seen on the Spalla, be indeed
                            removed from us, she is the very last of all the Della Croce. I cannot
                            easily read the billet of your brother. He does not write good Corsican
                            of our side of the mountains, but some outlandish Tuscan. There is
                            something first which I cannot well decipher, and then I see your name
                            Signor Valentine Vogheno, and that you are the lord of very large
                            estates, in some district called Gloisterio?" He looked at me
                            inquiringly.
Instead of explaining that I was only the brother of the great Signor
                            Valentino, I bowed, alas I bowed with a hot flush on my cheeks. What
                            could it matter, and why should I interrupt him, if he chose to deceive
                            himself? Lily charmed away all hesitation, by clapping her little hands,
                            and crying, "Sweetest mine, I am so glad."
"Then, upon two conditions I will give you my daughter. The first, that
                            you leave this island, and do not see our Lily, write to, or even hear
                            from her, for a period of six months. If she has not outgrown her love,
                            she will then be almost old enough to wed. I mean, of course, if Lepardo
                            does not appear. The other condition is that you shall promise on the
                            holy relics, and you as well, my flower, never to part with these old
                            estates, but keep them for Lily while she lives, and transmit them to
                            her second child."
A load of terror was off my heart—I thought he was going to bind me to
                            the accursed Vendetta. Even for my Lily, I could hardly have taken that
                            pledge. So I assented readily to the last stipulation, though it was
                            based upon a virtual lie of mine. But with Lily's eyes upon me, brimming
                            as they were with tears at the first condition, and her round arms
                            trembling to enfold me, could I stick at anything short of downright
                            murder? The first proviso I fought against in vain. Even Lily coaxed and
                            cried, without any good effect.
When at last we yielded to the stern decree, the venerable father, as we
                            knelt before him, joined our hands together, and poured a blessing on
                            us, which I did not lack. He had given me my blessing.
After this we sat down to supper, and the trusty musketeer, who had
                            watched the whole scene grimly, and without hearing all, knew what the
                            result was, he, I say, upon his perch began to improvise, or haply to
                            adapt, and sing to a childish air, some little verses upon the glad
                            occasion. Having exhausted his stock, down he leaped without permission,
                            and drank our health in a bumper of Luri wine.
Lily was now in due course of promotion. No longer was she the handmaid,
                            whose eyes created and rejoiced in countless mistakes of mine. Now she
                            was sitting by my side, as she had good right to be, and was lost in
                            pretty raptures at my gallant attentions. They were very nice, she
                            owned, but thoroughly un-Corsican. How I wished her father and the old
                            fusileer away!
