
CHAPTER XVI.
About half a mile from Tossil's Barton (the farmhouse where we lived)
                            there is a valley, or rather a vast ravine, of a very uncommon
                            formation. A narrow winding rocky combe, where slabs, and tors, and
                            boulder stones, seem pasturing on the velvet grass, or looking into the
                            bright trout-stream, which leaps down a flight of steps without a tree
                            to shade its flash and foam; this narrow, but glad dingle, as it nears
                            the sea, bursts suddenly back into a desert gorge, cleaving the heights
                            that front the Bristol Channel. The mountain sides from right and left,
                            straight as if struck by rule, steeply converge, like a high-pitched
                            roof turned upside down; so steep indeed that none can climb them. Along
                            the deep bottom gleams a silver chord, where the cramped stream chafes
                            its way, bedded and banked in stone, without a blade of green. From top
                            to bottom of this huge ravine there is no growth, no rocks, no cliffs,
                            no place to stay the foot, but all a barren, hard, grey stretch of
                            shingle, slates, and gliddery stones: as if the ballast of ten million
                            fleets had been shot in two enormous piles, and were always on the slip.
                            Looking at it we forget that there is such a thing as life: the
                            desolation is not painful, because it is so grand. The brief noon glare
                            of the sun on these Titanic dry walls, where even a lichen dies; the
                            gaunt desert shade stealing back to its lair in the early afternoon; the
                            solemn step of evening stooping to her cloak below—I know not which of
                            these is the most impressive and mournful. No stir of any sort, no voice
                            of man or beast, no flow of tide, ever comes to visit here; the little
                            river, after a course of battles, wins no peaceful union with the sea,
                            but ponds against a shingle bar, and gurgles away in slow whirlpools.
                            Only a fitful moaning wind draws up and down the melancholy chasm. The
                            famous "Valley of Rocks," some four miles to the east, seems to me
                            common-place and tame compared to this grand defile. Yet how many men I
                            know who would smoke their pipes throughout it!
Thinking so much of this place, I long wished my mother to see it; and
                            finding her rather stronger one lovely April morning, I persuaded her
                            forth, embarked on Mrs. Huxtable's donkey. We went, down a small
                            tributary glen, towards the head of the great defile. The little glen
                            was bright, and green, and laughing into bud, and bantering a swift
                            brook, which could hardly stop to answer, but left the ousels as it
                            passed to talk at leisure about their nests, and the trout to make those
                            musical leaps that sound so crisp through the alders. Another stream
                            meets it among the bushes below, and now they are entitled to the
                            dignity of a bridge whereon grows the maidenhair fern, and which, with
                            its rude and pointed arch, looks like an old pack-saddle upon the
                            stream.
From this point we followed a lane, leading obliquely up the ascent,
                            before the impassable steep begins. Having tethered our quiet donkey to
                            a broken gate, I took my mother along a narrow path through the thicket
                            to the view of the great ravine. Standing at the end of this path, she
                            was astonished at the scene before her. We had gained a height of about
                            two hundred feet, the hill-top stretched a thousand feet above us. We
                            stood on the very limit of vegetation, a straight line passing clown the
                            hill where the quarry-like steep begins.
My dear mother was tired, and I had called her to come home, lest the
                            view should make her giddy; when suddenly she stepped forward to gather
                            a harebell straggling among the stones. The shingle beneath her foot
                            gave way, then below her, and around, and above her head, began in a
                            great mass to glide. Buried to the knees and falling sideways, she was
                            sinking slowly at first, then quickly and quicker yet, with a hoarse
                            roar of moving tons of stone, gathering and whelming upon her, down the
                            rugged abyss. Screaming, I leaped into the avalanche after her, never
                            thinking that I could only do harm. Stronger, and swifter, and louder,
                            and surging, and berged with shouldering stone the solid cascade rushed
                            on. I saw dearest mother below me trying to clasp her hands in prayer,
                            and to give me her last word. With a desperate effort dragging my shawl
                            from the gulfing crash, I threw it towards her, but she did not try to
                            grasp it. A heavy stone leaped over me, and struck her on the head; her
                            head dropped back, she lay senseless, and nearly buried. We were dashing
                            more headlong and headlong, in the rush of the mountain side, to the
                            precipice over the river, and my senses had all but failed, and revenge
                            was prone before judgment, when I heard through the din a shout. On the
                            brink of firm ground stood a man, and signed me to throw my shawl. With
                            all my remaining strength I did so, but not as he meant, for I cast it
                            entirely to him, and pointed to my mother below. One instant the
                            avalanche paused, he leaped about twenty feet down, through the heather
                            and gorse, and stayed his descent by clutching a stout ash sapling. To
                            this in a moment he fastened my shawl, (a long and strong plaid), and
                            just as my mother was being swept by, he plunged with the other end into
                            the shingle tide. I saw him leap and struggle towards her, and lift her
                            out of the gliding tomb, gliding himself the while, and sway himself and
                            his burden, by means of the shawl, not back (for that was impossible),
                            but obliquely downwards; I saw the strong sapling bow to the strain like
                            a fishing-rod, while hope and terror fought hard within me; I saw him,
                            by a desperate effort, which bent the ash-tree to the ground, leap from
                            the whirling havoc, and lay my mother on the dead fern and heath. Of the
                            rest, I know nothing, having become quite unconscious, before he saved
                            me, in the same manner.
We must have been taken home in Farmer Huxtable's butt, for I remember
                            well that, amidst the stir and fright of our return, and while my mother
                            was still insensible, Mrs. Huxtable fell savagely upon poor Suke, for
                            having despatched that elegant vehicle without cleaning it from the lime
                            dust; whereby, as she declared, our dresses (so rent and tattered by the
                            jagged stones) were "muxed up to shords." Poor Suke would have been
                            likely to fare much worse, if, at such a time, she had stopped to dust
                            the cart.
When the farmer came home, his countenance, rich in capacity for
                            expressing astonishment, far outdid his words. "Wull, wull, for sure!
                            wuther ye did or no?" was all the vent he could find for his ideas
                            during the rest of the day; though it was plain to all who knew him that
                            he was thinking profoundly upon the subject, and wholly occupied with
                            it. In the course of the following week he advised me very impressively
                            never to do it again; and nothing could ever persuade him but that I
                            jumped in, and my mother came to rescue me.
But his wife very soon had all her wits about her. She sent to "Coom" for
                            the doctor (I begged that it might not be Mr. Dawe's physician), she put
                            dear mother to bed, and dressed her wounds with simples worth ten
                            druggists' shops, and bathed her temples with rosemary, and ran down the
                            glen for "fathery ham" (Valerian), which she declared "would kill nine
                            sorts of infermation;" then she hushed the entire household, permitting
                            no tongue to move except her own, and beat her eldest boy (a fine young
                            Huxtable) for crying, whereupon he roared; she even conquered her strong
                            desire to know much more than all could tell; and showed my mother such
                            true kindness and pity that I loved her for it at once, and ever
                            since.
Breathing slowly and heavily, my poor mother lay in the bed which had
                            long been the pride of Tossil's Barton. The bedstead was made of carved
                            oak, as many of them are in North Devon, and would have been handsome
                            and striking, if some ancestral Huxtable had not adorned it with
                            whitewash. But the quilt was what they were proud of. It was formed of
                            patches of diamond shape and most incongruous colours, with a death's
                            head in the centre and crossbones underneath.
When first I beheld it, I tossed it down the stairs, but my mother would
                            have it brought back and used, because she knew how the family gloried
                            in it, and she could not bear to hurt their feelings.
One taper white hand lay on it now, with the tender skin bruised and
                            discoloured by blows. She had closed the finger which bore her wedding
                            ring, and it still remained curved and rigid. In an agony of tears, I
                            knelt by the side of the bed, watching her placid and deathlike face.
                            Till then I had never known how strongly and deeply I loved her.
I firmly believe that she was revived in some degree by the glare of the
                            patched quilt upon her eyes. The antagonism of nature was roused, and
                            brought home her wandering powers. Feebly glancing away, she came
                            suddenly to herself, and exclaimed:
"Is she safe? is she safe?'
"Yes, mother; here I am, with my own dear mother."
She opened her arms, and held me in a nervous cold embrace, and thanked
                            God, and wept.
