
CHAPTER V.
That same evening, as I was sitting in my lonely room, yet not quite
                            alone,—for little Sally, who always did as I bade her, was scratching
                            and blotting her best copy-book, under my auspices,—in burst Mrs.
                            Huxtable, without stopping to knock as usual.
"Oh Miss Clerer, what have e been and doed?
                            Varmer's in crule trouble. Us'll arl have to goo to gaol to-morrow,
                            chillers and arl."
She was greatly flurried and out of breath, and yet seemed proud of what
                            she had to tell. She did not require much asking, nor beat about the
                            bush, as many women do; but told me the story shortly, and then asked me
                            to come and hear all particulars from Tim Badcock the farm-labourer, who
                            had seen the whole.
Tim sat by the kitchen fire with a pint of cider by him on the little
                            round table; strong evidence that his tidings, after all, were not so
                            very unwelcome.
"Wull, you zee, Miss," said Tim, after getting up, and pulling his rough
                            forelock, "you zee, Miss, the Maister coom out this arternoon, in a
                            weist zort of a wai, as if her hadn't had no dinner." Here he gave a sly
                            look at "the Missus," who had the credit of stopping the supplies, when
                            the farmer had been too much on the cruise.
"What odds to thee, Tim," she replied, "what odds to thee, what thee
                            betters has for dinner?"
"Noo fai," said Tim, "zo long as ai gits maine, and my missus arlways has
                            un raddy. Zo I zed to Bill, zays I, 'Best maind what thee's at boy,
                            there's a starm a coomin, zure as my name's Timothy Badcock.' Howsomever
                            her didn't tak on atarl wi we, but kitched up a shivel, and worked awai
                            without niver a ward. 'Twur the tap of the clave, 'langside of the beg
                            fuzz, where the braidle road coomth along 'twixt that and the double
                            hadge; and us was arl a stubbing up the bushes as plaisant as could be,
                            to plough thiccy plat for clover, coom some rain, plase God."
"Git on, Tim, wull e," cried his impatient mistress, "us knows arl about
                            that. Cas'n thee tull it no quicker?"
"Wull, Miss," continued Tim, in no hurry whatever, "prasently us zees a
                            girt beg chap on a zort of a brown cob, a coomin in our diraction"—Tim
                            was proud of this word, and afraid that we should fail to appreciate
                            it—"they was a coomin, as you might zay, in our diraction this beg chap,
                            and anither chap langside on him. Wull, when 'um coom'd within spaking
                            room of us, beg chap a' horsebarck hollers out, 'Can 'e tell, my men,
                            where Jan Uxtable live?' Avore I had taime to spake, Maister lifts
                            hissell up, and zaith, 'What doo 'e want to know for, my faine feller?'
                            every bit the zame as ai be a tullin of it to you. 'What's the odds to
                            thee,' zays tother chap, 'thee d'st better kape a zivil tongue in thee
                            head. I be Tom Gundry from Carnwall.' And with that he stood up in his
                            starrups, as beg a feller as iver you zee, Miss. Wull, Maister knowed
                            all about Tom Gundry and what a was a coom for, and zo did I, and the
                            boy, and arl the country round; for Maister have gotten a turble name
                            for rarstling; maybe, Miss, you've a heer'd on him in Lunnon town?"
"I have never been in London, Tim, since I was a child; and I know
                            nothing at all about wrestling."
"Wull, Miss, that be nayther here nor there. But there had been a dale of
                            brag after Maister had thrown arl they Carnishers to Barnstable vair,
                            last year, about vetching this here Tom Gundry, who wor the best man in
                            Cornwall, to throw our Maister. Howsomever, it be time for ai to crack
                            on a bit. 'Ah,' zays the man avoot, who zimth had coom to back un, 'ah,
                            'twor arl mighty faine for Uxtable to play skittles with our zecond rate
                            men. Chappell or Ellicombe cud have doed as much as that. Rackon Jan
                            Uxtable wud vind a different game with Tom Gundry here.' 'Rackon he
                            wud,' zaith Gundry, 'a had better jine a burial club, if her've got ere
                            a waife and vamily.'"
"Noo. Did a zay that though?" inquired Mrs. Huxtable, much excited.
"'Coom now,' my maister zaith, trying to look smarl behaind the fuzz,
                            'thee must throw me, my lad, avore thee can throw Jan Uxtable. He be a
                            better man mainly nor ai be this dai. But ai baint in no oomer for
                            playin' much jist now, and rackon ai should hoort any man ai kitched
                            on.' 'Her that be a good un, Zam, baint it now?' zaith Gundry to little
                            chap, the very zame as ai be a tullin it now, 'doth the fule s'pose ai
                            be ratten? Ai've half a maind to kick un over this hadge; jist thee hold
                            the nag!' 'Sober now,' zaith varmer, and ai zeed a was gettin' rad in
                            the chakes, 'God knows ai don't feel no carl to hoort 'e. Ai'll gie thee
                            wan chance more, Tom Gundry, as thee'st a coom arl this wai fram
                            Carnwall. Can 'e trod a path in thiccy country, zame as this here be?'
                            And wi' that, a walked into the beg fuzz, twaice so haigh as this here
                            room, and the stocks begger round nor my body, and harder nor wrought
                            hiern. A jist stratched his two hons, raight and left, and twitched un
                            up, wan by wan, vor ten gude lanyard, as asily as ai wud pull spring
                            inyons. 'Now, wull e let me lone?' zaith he, zo zoon as a coom barck, wi
                            his brath a little quicker by rason of the exarcise, 'wull 'e let me
                            lone?' 'Ee's fai, wull I,' zaith the man avoot. 'Hor,' zaith Tom Gundry,
                            who had been a shopping zumwhere, 'thee
                            cans't do a gude dai's work, my man, tak that vor thee's wages.' And wi'
                            that a lets fly at Maister's vace wi' a light hash stick a carr'd,
                            maning to raide off avore Maister cud coom to's brath again. In a crack
                            Jan Uxtable zet both his hons under the stommick of the nag, one avore
                            the starrup and one behaind, zame as I maight to this here little
                            tabble, and haved un, harse and man, clane over hadge into Muster Yeo's
                            turmot falde. Then with wan heft, a kitched up tother chap, and zent un
                            sprarling after un, zame as if 'twor this here stule after the
                            tabble."
I thought poor Tim, in the excitement of his story, would have thrown
                            table and stool over the settle to illustrate it; and if he had, Mrs.
                            Huxtable would have forgiven him.
"'Thar,' zaith our Maister, as plaisant as cud be, and ai thought us shud
                            have died of laffing, 'thar now, if zo be the owner of thiccy falde
                            zummons e for traspash, you zay Jan Uxtable zent e on a little arrand,
                            to vaind a Carnisher as can do the laike to he.' And wi' that, a waiped
                            his hons with a slip of vern, and tuk a little drap of zider, and full
                            to's wark again."
"Wull, but Tim," asked the farmer's wife, to lose no part of the effect,
                            "what zort of a hadge wor it now? Twor a little hadge maybe, no haigher
                            nor the zettle barck."
"Wor it though?" said Tim, "thee knows better nor that, Missus. It be the
                            beggest hadge on arl the varm, wi' a double row of saplin hash atap. Her
                            maks the boundary betwixt the two parishes, and ain't been trimmed these
                            vaive year, ai can swear."
"And how be the both on 'em now, Tim? A must have gone haigh enough to
                            channge the mune.
"Wull, Miss," said Tim, addressing me, for he had told his Mistress all
                            the story twice, "Tom Gundry brak his collar boun, and zarve 'un raight,
                            for a brak Phil Dascombe's a puppose whun a got 'un in a trap, that
                            taime down to Bodmin thar; and harse gat a rick of his taial; but the
                            little chap, he vell upon his hat, and that zaved him kindly. But I
                            heer'd down to Pewter Will's, whur I gooed for a drap of zumthin for my
                            waife's stommick, ai heer'd zay there, as how Constable was a coomin to
                            Maister this very naight, if Carnishers cud have perswadded un. But
                            Constable zaith, zaith he, 'Twor all along o you Garnish chaps, fust
                            battery was mad, and fust blow gien, and wi'out you can zhow me Squaire
                            Drake's warrant, I wunt have nout to do wi' it, not ai; and that be law
                            and gospel in Davonsheer and in Cornwall.'"
"Tim," said Mrs. Huxtable, "I'se warrant thee's niver tould so long a
                            spin up in thee's laife avore. And thee's tould it wonnerful well too;
                            hathn't un Miss Clerer? Zuke, here be the kay of zellar, gie Tim a half
                            a paint more zider; and thee mai'st have a drap theesell, gall. Waipe
                            thee mouth fust."
"Ah," said Tim, favouring me with a wink, in the excess of his glory,
                            "rackon they Carnishers 'll know the wai off Tossil's Barton varm next
                            taime, wi'out no saign postesses."
