
CHAPTER I.
"Long-shadowed death," some poet says. How well I know and feel it! the
                            gloom before him deepening as he comes, and the world of darkness
                            stretching many years behind.
I once dared to believe that no earthly blow could ever subdue, or even
                            bend my resolute will. I now found my mistake, and cared not even to
                            think about it.
On the morning after my mother's death I wandered about, and could not
                            tell where to go. The passionate clinging which would not allow me,
                            during that blank and sleepless night, to quit what remained of her
                            presence, and the jealous despair which felt it a wrong that any one
                            else should approach, had now settled down to a languid heaviness, and
                            all that I cared for was to be let alone. All the places where we had
                            been together I visited now, without knowing why, perhaps it was to see
                            if she were there. Then vaguely disappointed, I thought there must be
                            some mistake, and wearily went the dreary round again.
I cannot clearly call to mind, but think it must have been that day, when
                            I was in the corner of the room, looking at the place whence they had
                            taken dear mother. Ann Maples and Mrs. Huxtable came in, followed by the
                            farmer, who had left his shoes at the door. They did not see me, so I
                            suppose it must have been in the evening. They were come to remove the
                            sofa. I have not the heart to follow their brogue.
"Yes to be sure," said Mrs. Huxtable, looking at it with a short sigh. It
                            was odd that it should strike me then, but all she did was short.
"Get it out of her sight, poor dear," said Ann Maples.
"To see her sit and look at it!" exclaimed the farmer's wife.
"With her eyes so dry and stupid like!" returned the other. "Poor child,
                            she must have cried herself out. I have known her sit by the hour, and
                            stare at the bed where her father was killed, but it was a different
                            sort of look to this."
"Ah well, she has lost a good mother," said Dame Huxtable. "God grant my
                            poor little chicks may never be left like her."
"What's your children to talk of along with Miss Clara?" asked my
                            nurse.
Mrs. Huxtable was about to answer sharply, but checked herself, and only
                            said:
"All children is much of a muchness to their mothers."
"Don't tell me," cried Ann Maples, who had never had any.
The farmer came between them, walking on tip-toe.
"For good, now, don't ye fall out at such a time as this here. What's our
                            affairs to speak of now?"
"What's any folks," asked Mrs. Huxtable, "that has the breath of
                            life?"
"And goes forth in the morning, and is cast into the oven, ma'am,"
                            continued her antagonist.
"Ah, bless thee, yes!" the farmer replied, "I'll take my gospel oath of
                            it. It's not much good I am at parsoning, and maybe I likes a drop of
                            drink when the weather is fitty; but that young chestnut filly that's
                            just come home from breaking, I'd sell her to a gipsey, and trust him
                            for the money, if so be 'twould make the young lady turn her face to the
                            Lord. Can't ye speak to her now about it, either of you women? Doo'e
                            now, doo'e."
"How could I possible?" his wife exclaimed; "why, farmer, you must be
                            mazed. A high young lady like that, and the tears still hot in her
                            eyes!"
"The very reason, wife, the very time and reason. But likely Mrs. Maples
                            would be the proper person."
"Thank you, sir," my nurse replied, "Mrs. Maples knows good manners a
                            little. Thank you, sir; Mrs. Maples wasn't born in Devonshire."
"I ask your pardon, ma'am," said the farmer, much abashed, "I humbly ask
                            your pardon; I wasn't taught no better. I can only go by what I have
                            seen, and what seems to come inside of me. And I know, in our way of
                            business, when a calf is weaned from the mother, the poor beastess hath
                            a call for some one else to feed it. Maybe it's no harm to let her have
                            the refusal." Therewith he opened my mother's Bible, and placed it
                            reverently on the window-seat. "Waife, do'e mind the time as poor Aunt
                            Betsy died, over there to Rowley Mires?"
"For sure I do, but what have her got to do with it? Us mustn't talk of
                            her, I reckon, any more than of the chillers, though us be so unlucky as
                            to be born in Devonshire. Fie, fie, thee ought to know better than to
                            talk of poor Aunt Betsy along of a lady, and before our betters." Here
                            she curtsied to Ann Maples, with a flash of light in her eyes, and
                            rubbing them hard with her apron.
"Well, well," replied the farmer, sadly, "mayhap so I did. And who be I
                            to gainsay? Mayhap so I did;" he dropped his voice, but added, after
                            some reflection, "It be hard to tell the rights of it; but sure her were
                            a woman."
"Who said her were a man, thee zany?" Mrs. Huxtable was disappointed that
                            the case would not be argued. The farmer discreetly changed the
                            subject.
"Now, if it was me," he continued, "I wouldn't think of taking this here
                            settle-bed away from the poor thing."
"Why not, farmer?" asked Mrs. Huxtable, sharply. "Give me a reason for
                            leaving it, and I'll give you ten for taking it."
"I can't give no reasons. But maybe it comforts her a little."
"Comfort indeed!" said his wife; "breaks her heart with, crying, more
                            likely. Come, lend a hand, old heavy-strap; what can a great dromedary
                            like thee know about young wenches?"
At any rate he knew more than she did. The moment they touched it I burst
                            forth from my corner, and flung myself upon it, rolling as if I would
                            bury myself in the ecstasy of anguish. What they did I cannot tell; they
                            might say what they liked, I had not cried till then.
The next day I was sitting stupified and heavy, trying once more to meet
                            the necessity of thinking about my mother's funeral; but again and
                            again, the weakness of sorrow fell away from the subject. The people of
                            the house kept from me. Mrs. Huxtable had done her best, but they knew I
                            would rather be alone.
The door was opened quietly, and some one entered in a stealthy manner.
                            Regarding it as an intrusion, I would not look that way.
"Miss Clara dear," began the farmer, standing behind me, and whispering,
                            "I humbly ask your pardon, Miss, for calling you that same. But we have
                            had a wonderful fine season, sure enough."
I made him no answer, being angry at his ill-timed common-place.
"If you please, Miss, such a many lambs was never known afore, and
                            turnips fine last winter, and corn, and hay, and every kind of stock, a
                            fetching of such prices. The farmers about here has made their fortune
                            mainly."
"I am glad to hear that you are so prosperous, Mr. Huxtable," I answered,
                            very coldly.
"Yes fie, good times, Miss, wonderful good times, we don't know what to
                            do with our money a'rnost."
"Buy education and good taste," I said, "instead of thrusting your
                            happiness upon such as I."
How little I knew him! Shall I ever forgive myself that speech?
"Ah, I wish I could," he answered, sadly, "I wish with all my heart I
                            could. But we must be born to the like of that, I am afeared, Miss
                            Vaughan."
Poor fellow! he knew nothing of irony, as we do, who are born to good
                            taste, otherwise I might have suspected him of it then.
He suddenly wished me "good evening," although it was middle-day, and
                            then he made off for the door, but came back again with a desperate
                            resolve, and spoke, for him, very quickly, looking all the time at his
                            feet.
"There, I can't make head or tail of it, Miss Clara, but wife said I was
                            to do it so. Take the danged money, that's a dear, and for good now
                            don't be offended, for I cas'n help it."
He opened his great hand, which was actually shaking, and hurriedly
                            placed on the sofa a small packet tied in the leaf of a copy book; then
                            suddenly put in mind of something, he made a dive, and snatching it up,
                            flung it upon a Windsor chair. It fell with a chink, the string slipped
                            off, and out rolled at least forty sovereigns and guineas, and a number
                            of crown-pieces.
Peremptorily I called him back, for he was running out of the door.
"Mr. Huxtable, what is the meaning of this?"
"Meaning, Miss! Lord bless you, Miss Clara, there bain't no meaning of
                            it; only it corned into my head last night, as I was laying awake,
                            humbly asking your pardon, Miss, for that same, that if so be you should
                            desire, that the dear good lady herself might like, if I may make so
                            bold, meaning that it isn't fitly like, that she should lay nowhere
                            else, but alongside of her own husband, till death do them part, Mr.
                            Henry Valentine Vaughan, Esquire, Vaughan Park, in the county of
                            Gloucestershire. There I be as bad as Beany Dawe."
He repeated his rhyme, with some relief, hoping to change the subject. I
                            caught him by both hands, and burst into tears.
"Don't ye now," he said, with a thickness in his voice, "don't ye now, my
                            dearie, leastways unless it does you good."
"It does me good, indeed," I sobbed, "to find still in the world so kind
                            a heart as yours."
Though I longed to look him in the face, I knew that I must not do so. Oh
                            why are men so ashamed of manly tears? Perceiving that I could not
                            speak, he began to talk for both of us, making a hundred blundering
                            apologies, trying to hide his knowledge of my poverty, and to prove that
                            he was only paying a debt which extended over many years of tenancy. He
                            was not at all an imaginative man, but delicacy supplied him with
                            invention. So deep a sense pervades all classes in this English country,
                            that want of money is an indictment, which none but the culprit may
                            sign. Poor or rich, I should not be worth despising, if I had shown the
                            paltry pride of declining such a loan.
The tears came anew to my eyes when I found that what had been brought so
                            freely was the savings of years of honest toil, a truth which the owners
                            had tried to conceal by polishing the old coin. But not being skilled,
                            dear souls, in plate-cleaning, they had left some rotten-stone adhering
                            to the George and Dragons.
