<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Autobiography of a Slander</title><author>Lyall, Edna [pseud.] (1857-1903).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
MY FIFTH STAGE
Also it is wise not to believe everything you hear, not immediately to carry to the
      ears of others what you have either heard or believed.Thomas À
     Kempis.
Though I was read in silence at the breakfast table and not passed on to the Archdeacon, I
     lay dormant in Mrs. Selldon’s mind all day, and came to her aid that night when she was at her
     wits’ end for something to talk about.
Mrs. Selldon, though a most worthy and estimable person, was of a phlegmatic temperament; her
     sympathies were not easily aroused, her mind was lazy and torpid, in conversation she was
     unutterably dull.  There were times when she was painfully conscious of this, and would have
     given much for the ceaseless flow of words which fell from the lips of her friend Mrs.
     Milton-Cleave.  And that evening after my arrival chanced to be one of these occasions, for
     there was a dinner-party at the Archdeaconry, given in honour of a well-known author who was
     spending a few days in the neighbourhood.
“I wish you could have Mr. Shrewsbury at your end of the table, Thomas,” Mrs. Selldon had
     remarked to her husband with a sigh, as she was arranging the guests on paper that
     afternoon.
“Oh, he must certainly take you in, my dear,” said the Archdeacon.  “And he seems a very
     clever, well-read man, I am sure you will find him easy to talk to.”
Poor Mrs. Selldon thought that she would rather have had some one who was neither clever nor
     well-read.  But there was no help for her, and, whether she would or not, she had to go in to
     dinner with the literary lion.
Mr. Mark Shrewsbury was a novelist of great ability.  Some twenty years before, he had been
     called to the bar, and, conscious of real talent, had been greatly embittered by the
     impossibility of getting on in his profession.  At length, in disgust, he gave up all hopes of
     success and devoted himself instead to literature.  In this field he won the recognition for
     which he craved; his books were read everywhere, his name became famous, his income steadily
     increased, and he had the pleasant consciousness that he had found his vocation.  Still, in
     spite of his success, he could not forget the bitter years of failure and disappointment which
     had gone before, and though his novels were full of genius they were pervaded by an undertone
     of sarcasm, so that people after reading them were more ready than before to take cynical views
     of life.
He was one of those men whose quiet impassive faces reveal scarcely anything of their
     character.  He was neither tall nor short, neither dark nor fair, neither handsome nor the
     reverse; in fact his personality was not in the least impressive; while, like most true
     artists, he observed all things so quietly that you rarely discovered that he was observing at
     all.
“Dear me!” people would say, “Is Mark Shrewsbury really here?  Which is he?  I don’t see any
     one at all like my idea of a novelist.”
“There he is—that man in spectacles,” would be the reply.
And really the spectacles were the only noteworthy thing about him.
Mrs. Selldon, who had seen several authors and authoresses in her time, and knew that they
     were as a rule most ordinary, hum-drum kind of people, was quite prepared for her fate.  She
     remembered her astonishment as a girl when, having laughed and cried at the play, and taken the
     chief actor as her ideal hero, she had had him pointed out to her one day in Regent Street, and
     found him to be a most commonplace-looking man, the very last person one would have supposed
     capable of stirring the hearts of a great audience.
Meanwhile dinner progressed, and Mrs. Selldon talked to an empty-headed but loquacious man on
     her left, and racked her brains for something to say to the alarmingly silent author on her
     right.  She remembered hearing that Charles Dickens would often sit silent through the whole of
     dinner, observing quietly those about him, but that at dessert he would suddenly come to life
     and keep the whole table in roars of laughter.  She feared that Mr. Shrewsbury meant to imitate
     the great novelist in the first particular, but was scarcely likely to follow his example in
     the last.  At length she asked him what he thought of the cathedral, and a few tepid remarks
     followed.
“How unutterably this good lady bores me!” thought the author.
“How odd it is that his characters talk so well in his books, and that he is such a stick!”
     thought Mrs. Selldon.
“I suppose it’s the effect of cathedral-town atmosphere,” reflected the author.
“I suppose he is eaten up with conceit and won’t trouble himself to talk to me,” thought the
     hostess.
By the time the fish had been removed they had arrived at a state of mutual contempt. 
     Mindful of the reputation they had to keep up, however, they exerted themselves a little more
     while the entrées went round.
“Seldom reads, I should fancy, and never thinks!” reflected the author, glancing at Mrs.
     Selldon’s placid unintellectual face.  “What on earth can I say to her?”
“Very unpractical, I am sure,” reflected Mrs. Selldon.  “The sort of man who lives in a world
     of his own, and only lays down his pen to take up a book.  What subject shall I start?”
“What delightful weather we have been having the last few days!” observed the author.  “Real
     genuine summer weather at last.”  The same remark had been trembling on Mrs. Selldon’s lips. 
     She assented with great cheerfulness and alacrity; and over that invaluable topic, which is
     always so safe, and so congenial, and so ready to hand, they grew quite friendly, and the
     conversation for fully five minutes was animated.
An interval of thought followed.
“How wearisome is society!” reflected Mrs. Selldon.  “It is hard that we must spend so much
     money in giving dinners and have so much trouble for so little enjoyment.”
“One pays dearly for fame,” reflected the author.  “What a confounded nuisance it is to waste
     all this time when there are the last proofs of ‘What Caste?’ to be done for the nine-o’clock
     post to-morrow morning!  Goodness knows what time I shall get to bed to-night!”
Then Mrs. Selldon thought regretfully of the comfortable easy chair that she usually enjoyed
     after dinner, and the ten minutes’ nap, and the congenial needle-work.  And Mark Shrewsbury
     thought of his chambers in Pump Court, and longed for his type-writer, and his books, and his
     swivel chair, and his favourite meerschaum.
“I should be less afraid to talk if there were not always the horrible idea that he may take
     down what one says,” thought Mrs. Selldon.
“I should be less bored if she would only be her natural self,” reflected the author.  “And
     would not talk prim platitudes.”  (This was hard, for he had talked nothing else himself.) 
     “Does she think she is so interesting that I am likely to study her for my next book?”
“Have you been abroad this summer?” inquired Mrs. Selldon, making another spasmodic attempt
     at conversation.
“No, I detest travelling,” replied Mark Shrewsbury.  “When I need change I just settle down
     in some quiet country district for a few months—somewhere near Windsor, or Reigate, or
     Muddleton.  There is nothing to my mind like our English scenery.”
“Oh, do you know Muddleton?” exclaimed Mrs. Selldon.  “Is it not a charming little place?  I
     often stay in the neighbourhood with the Milton-Cleaves.”
“I know Milton-Cleave well,” said the author.  “A capital fellow, quite the typical country
     gentleman.”
“Is he not?” said Mrs. Selldon, much relieved to have found this subject in common.  “His
     wife is a great friend of mine; she is full of life and energy, and does an immense amount of
     good.  Did you say you had stayed with them?”
“No, but last year I took a house in that neighbourhood for a few months; a most charming
     little place it was, just fit for a lonely bachelor.  I dare say you remember it—Ivy Cottage,
     on the Newton Road.”
“Did you stay there?  Now what a curious coincidence!  Only this morning I heard from Mrs.
     Milton-Cleave that Ivy Cottage has been taken this summer by a Mr. Sigismund Zaluski, a Polish
     merchant, who is doing untold harm in the neighbourhood.  He is a very clever, unscrupulous
     man, and has managed to take in almost every one.”
“Why, what is he?  A swindler?  Or a burglar in disguise, like the House on the
      Marsh fellow?” asked the author, with a little twinkle of amusement in his face.
“Oh, much worse than that,” said Mrs. Selldon, lowering her voice.  “I assure you, Mr.
     Shrewsbury, you would hardly credit the story if I were to tell it you, it is really stranger
     than fiction.”  Mark Shrewsbury pricked up his ears, he no longer felt bored, he began to think
     that, after all, there might be some compensation for this wearisome dinner-party.  He was
     always glad to seize upon material for future plots, and somehow the notion of a mysterious
     Pole suddenly making his appearance in that quiet country neighbourhood and winning undeserved
     popularity rather took his fancy.  He thought he might make something of it.  However, he knew
     human nature too well to ask a direct question.
“I am sorry to hear that,” he said, becoming all at once quite sympathetic and approachable. 
     “I don’t like the thought of those simple, unsophisticated people being hoodwinked by a
     scoundrel.”
“No; is it not sad?” said Mrs. Selldon.  “Such pleasant, hospitable people as they are!  Do
     you remember the Morleys?”
“Oh yes!  There was a pretty daughter who played tennis well.”
“Quite so—Gertrude Morley.  Well, would you believe it, this miserable fortune-hunter is
     actually either engaged to her or on the eve of being engaged!  Poor Mrs. Milton-Cleave is so
     unhappy about it, for she knows, on the best authority, that Mr. Zaluski is unfit to enter a
     respectable house.”
“Perhaps he is really some escaped criminal?” suggested Mr. Shrewsbury, tentatively.
Mrs. Selldon hesitated.  Then, under the cover of the general roar of conversation, she said
     in a low voice:—
“You have guessed quite rightly.  He is one of the Nihilists who were concerned in the
     assassination of the late Czar.”
“You don’t say so!” exclaimed Mark Shrewsbury, much startled.  “Is it possible?”
“Indeed, it is only too true,” said Mrs. Selldon.  “I heard it only the other morning, and on
     the very best authority.  Poor Gertrude Morley!  My heart bleeds for her.”
Now I can’t help observing here that this must have been the merest figure of speech, for
     just then there was a comfortable little glow of satisfaction about Mrs. Selldon’s heart.  She
     was so delighted to have “got on well,” as she expressed it, with the literary lion, and by
     this time dessert was on the table, and soon the tedious ceremony would be happily over.
“But how did he escape?” asked Mark Shrewsbury, still with the thought of “copy” in his
     mind.
“I don’t know the details,” said Mrs. Selldon.  “Probably they are only known to himself. 
     But he managed to escape somehow in the month of March 1881, and to reach England safely.  I
     fear it is only too often the case in this world—wickedness is apt to be successful.”
“To flourish like a green bay tree,” said Mark Shrewsbury, congratulating himself on the
     aptness of the quotation, and its suitability to the Archediaconal dinner-table.  “It is the
     strangest story I have heard for a long time.”  Just then there was a pause in the general
     conversation, and Mrs. Selldon took advantage of it to make the sign for rising, so that no
     more passed with regard to Zaluski.
Shrewsbury, flattering himself that he had left a good impression by his last remark, thought
     better not to efface it later in the evening by any other conversation with his hostess.  But
     in the small hours of the night, when he had finished his bundle of proofs, he took up his
     notebook and, strangling his yawns, made two or three brief, pithy notes of the story Mrs.
     Selldon had told him, adding a further development which occurred to him, and wondering to
     himself whether “Like a Green Bay Tree” would be a selling title.
After this he went to bed, and slept the sleep of the just, or the unbroken sleep which goes
     by that name.
</div></body></text></TEI>