
CHAPTER IV
The cottage was what any one who know Madame Amberg might have expected her cottage to be. It
     was sparsely furnished, except with explosive literature; there were very few chairs, and those
     few verging on decrepitude, but numerous tracts and pamphlets in divers civilized languages.
     Kitchen utensils were conspicuous chiefly by their absence, and presumably the owner relied
     consistently on the loan of the copper stewpan which had accompanied her guests from the farm.
     On the other hand, the kitchen walls were adorned by photographs, more or less fly-blown, of
     various political extremists, and a signed presentment of Rosa Luxemburg adorned a bedroom
     mantelpiece.
While Madame Peys made play with the stew-pan and a kettle, the honeymoon couple unpacked
     their bags and examined their new domain: still, to a certain extent, overawed by the silence
     and loneliness around it; still, unknown to themselves, speaking more gently and with more
     hesitation than usual. It was the familiar tang of the books and pamphlets, with which the
     shelves were crammed and the floor was heaped, that first revived their quieted spirits and
     created a sense of home. Woman and Democracy, even on the backs of books, had power to act as a
     tonic and trumpet-call, to reflect the atmosphere of noise and controversy where alone they
     could breathe with comfort. With unconscious relief they turned from the window and the
     prospect of the valley, green and untenanted, to entrench themselves against the assaults of
     the unknown behind the friendly and familiar volumes that had overflowed from Madame Amberg's
     deal book-shelves to Madame Amberg's uncarpeted floor. Conning them, handling them and turning
     their pages, they were again on the solid ground of impatient intolerance; they were back
     amongst their own, their cherished certainties. William in the presence of Belfort Bax felt his
     feet once more beneath him; Griselda, recognizing a pamphlet by Christabel Pankhurst, ceased to
     be troubled by the loneliness around her, grew animated and raised her voice.... And the
     savoury mess which Madame produced from her stewpan, combined with the no less excellent coffee
     that followed, dispelled for the moment the sense of mystery and the shadow of the New
     Idea.
The shadow obtruded itself more than once during the next three weeks or so; but on the whole
     they managed with fair success to be in the country and not of it—to create in the heart of
     their immemorial valley a little refuge and atmosphere of truly advanced suburbia. Their
     existence in the Ardennes valley was one of mutual affection and study—by which latter term
     they understood principally the reading of books they agreed with. From the cares and worries
     of housekeeping they were blissfully and entirely free; Madame Peys did their catering, taking
     toll, no doubt, of their simplicity and ignorance of French, but taking it with tact and
     discretion. Her bills were a weekly trouble to Griselda but not on account of their length;
     what she disliked was the embarrassing moment when she strove to conceal her complete ignorance
     of the items and difficulty in grasping the total as set forth in un-English-looking ciphers.
     Their tidying was also done daily and adequately, their cooking more than adequately; Madame
     Peys called them in the morning, set the house to rights and their various meals going, and
     looked in at intervals during the day, departing for the last time when supper was cooked and
     laid. Their daily doings fell naturally into routine; they rose of a morning to coffee steaming
     on the stove; and, having digested their breakfast, they usually proceeded to walk a little,
     concluding the exercise by sitting under the trees with a book which William read aloud to
     Griselda. They lunched sometimes in picnic fashion, sometimes at home; in the afternoon took
     another stroll or sat at home reading, with happy little interludes of talk. On two or three
     days they made small excursions to one of the neighbouring villages; on others William, with a
     pen and a frown of importance, would establish himself at the table after lunch was cleared
     away; he had a tract in hand on the Woman Question, and Griselda gently but firmly insisted
     that even in the first ecstasy of their honeymoon he should not lay it aside. Having a due
     sense of the value of his epoch-making work, he did not require much pressing; and while he
     frowned and scribbled and frowned and paused, she would sit by reading, and now and again
     glance up that she might meet his eye and smile. Long afterwards, months afterwards, when he
     had forgotten the epoch-making work and all he had meant to prove by it, he would remember how
     she had risen and come behind him, smoothing and fondling his ruffled hair and bending over to
     kiss him. He would drop his pen and lift his face to hers, sometimes in silence and sometimes
     murmuring foolishness.
In time, as the peaceful days crept by, they were sorry that, yielding to a romantic impulse,
     they had directed that neither paper nor letter should be forwarded during their absence. As a
     result of this prohibition their entire correspondence while they stayed in the valley
     consisted of one picture-postcard despatched by Madame Amberg from Liverpool at the moment of
     her embarkation for an extended lecture tour in the States. It was sent three days after their
     wedding, and expressed exuberant affection, but was singularly lacking in news of the outside
     world. To remove the prohibition would be to confess failure and suggest boredom, therefore
     neither ventured to hint at it; all the same, they knew in their secret hearts that they had
     overrated their resourcefulness. It was not that they palled on each other—far from it; but
     part at least of their mutual attraction was their mutual interest in certain subjects and
     limited phases of activity. Madame Amberg's revolutionary library, valuable as it was in
     distracting their thoughts from the silence and beauty around them and defending them against
     the unknown, could not entirely supply the place of daily whirl and unceasing snarl and
     argument; William pined unconsciously for the din and dust of the platform and Griselda missed
     the weekly temper into which she worked herself in sympathy with her weekly
      Suffragette. She missed it so much that at last she was moved to utterance—late on a
     still, heavy evening in August, when once or twice there had come up the valley a distant
     mutter as of thunder.
"Dear," she said gently, as they sat by the window after supper, "I don't know how you feel
     about it, but I am beginning to think that our life here is almost too peaceful. It is
     beautiful to sit here together and dream and forget the world—but is it a preparation for the
     life we are to lead? Is it a preparation for our work?"
William sighed a gentle sigh of relief, and his hand went out to his wife's in a squeeze of
     agreement and gratitude. As usual, their minds had jumped together and the thought of twain had
     been uttered by the lips of one.
"I've been thinking the same thing myself," he said. "It has struck me more than once. As you
     say, it's beautiful here in the heart of the country—nothing could be more beautiful. But I
     have wondered, especially lately, if it isn't enervating. It is good for some people, perhaps;
     but when you have an aim in life and the fighting spirit in you——"
"Yes," Griselda flared responsively, "it's the fighting spirit—and the Cause calling to us.
     I've been hearing the call getting louder and louder; we can't stand aside any longer, we
     haven't the right to stand aside. How can I—how dare I—rest and enjoy myself when, there are
     noble women struggling for freedom, suffering for freedom, keeping the flag flying——?"
And the unconscious little humbug clasped her hands and, from force of habit, rose to her
     feet, addressing an imaginary audience. William, an equally unconscious humbug, also rose to
     his feet and kissed her. It was one of those happy and right-minded moments in which
     inclination agrees with duty, and they were able to admire themselves and each other for a
     sacrifice which had cost them nothing.
The decision taken, there remained only the details of their speedy departure to settle.
     Their first impatient impulse was to leave for Brussels on the morrow, but on consideration
     they decided that the morrow would be too soon. Investigation of a local time-table revealed
     the fact that the connection with Brussels—the only tolerable connection—meant a start in the
     very early morning; but an early start meant an overnight warning to the farm-boy, Philippe,
     that his services would be needful to carry their bags to the station—and the farm-people, all
     of them, went to bed soon after the sun and were certainly by now asleep. There was, further,
     the old lady to settle with where financial matters were concerned, and it always took time to
     make out her illegible bill. On reflection, therefore, they decided for the following day.
"I hope," Griselda meditated, "that I shall be able to make Madame Peys understand that we
     want the boy the first thing in the morning. I expect she will see what I mean if I show her
     the train in the time-table and say 'Philippe,' and point to the bags. That ought to make it
     clear. It rather detracts from the enjoyment of being abroad—not being able to make people
     understand what you say. Interlaken was much more convenient in that way; all the waiters spoke
     English quite nicely. And the understanding is even more difficult than the speaking. To-night
     Madame was talking away hard to me all the time she was cooking our supper, but I couldn't make
     out one word she said—only that she was very excited. I said, 'Oui, oui,' every now and then,
     because she seemed to expect it, and I was sorry to see her upset. I thought perhaps one of the
     people at the farm was ill, but I've seen her son and his wife and the boy since, so it can't
     be that. Of course, she may have other relations in some other part of the country—or perhaps
     something has happened to one of the cows. I could see she was worried."
They sat until late side by side by the open window and talked in snatches of the world they
     were going back to—the dear, familiar, self-important world of the agitated and advanced. Its
     dust was already in their nostrils, its clamour already in their ears; in three days more they
     would be in it once again with their own little turbulent folk. The mere thought increased
     their sense of their own value, and they grew gay and excited as they talked and planned,
     instinctively turning their backs on the window and shutting out sight and sound of the country
     peace, the oppressive peace in which they had no part.
"What shall we do to-morrow, darling?" Griselda asked at length. The question was prompted by
     her longing for to-morrow to be over and her mind was in search of some method for inducing it
     to pass with swiftness.
They considered the point with that object in view, and decided that should the day prove
     fine they would spend it away from the cottage, taking their lunch with them. There was a
     winding path leading up through the woods to the heights which they had not yet explored except
     for a short distance; they would start out, provisioned, soon after breakfast, to go where the
     path led them, and eat their meal on the hill-top. Then home to supper, settlement with Madame,
     and an early departure next morning.... So they planned comfortably and without misgiving,
     while the world seethed in the melting-pot and the Kaiser battered at Liège.
"If it's fine," William cautioned again as they mounted the stairs to bed. "I've heard
     thunder several times in the distance, so we may have a storm in the morning."
There was no storm or sign of a storm in the morning. It must have passed over, Griselda
     said; she had listened to its faint and distant mutterings for half-an-hour before she fell
     asleep. Their meal of coffee and new-laid eggs was waiting on the stove as usual, and Madame
     Peys had vanished as usual before they came down to partake of it. They hard-boiled more eggs
     while they breakfasted, and, the meal disposed of, set to work to cut plentiful sandwiches and
     otherwise furnish their basket. As their road up the hill did not lead them past the farm, and
     Madame Peys had not yet put in an appearance for the process of tidying up, William inscribed
     in large round-hand on an envelope the word "Sorti," as a sign to their housekeeper
     that the preparation of a midday meal was unnecessary; and having placed the announcement on
     the kitchen table, duly weighted with a saucer, he took the basket on one arm, his wife on the
     other, and set out.
They met not a soul that morning as they mounted the winding little path—somewhat slowly, for
     the winding little path was not only longer than they had expected but very steep in places.
     Further, the day was hot even under the trees, and they rested more than once before they
     reached their goal, the heights that crowned the valley; rested with their backs against a
     beech-trunk, and talked of themselves and what interested them—of meetings past and to come, of
     the treachery of the Labour Party, of the wickedness of the Government and the necessity for
     terrifying its members by new and astounding tactics. The idea had been to lunch when the
     heights above them were gained; but the weight of the basket made itself felt in the heat, and
     they were still some distance from their goal when they decided it was time to lighten it. They
     did so in the customary fashion, ate well and heartily, and although they allowed an unhurried
     interval for digestion were even less enthusiastic about their uphill walk than they had been
     before partaking of lunch. It was a relief to them when at last they emerged from the trees and
     found themselves high above the valley and entering on a wide stretch of upland; the wide
     stretch of upland had no particular attraction, but it denoted the limits of their excursion
     and a consequent return downhill.
"Don't you think we've about been far enough?" Griselda suggested. "There's rather a glare
     now we're out of the wood, and it's not particularly pretty here."
William agreed whole-heartedly—adding, however, as a rider, that a rest was desirable before
     they started homeward, and that if they went as far as the rise in the ground a hundred yards
     to their right they would probably have quite a good view, and he expected there would be a
     nice breeze. In accordance with these expectations they mounted the knoll, found the breeze and
     the view they expected, and subsided in the shade of a bush. If they had but known it, they
     were the last tourists of their race who for many and many a day to come were to look on the
     scene before them. Had they but known it, they would certainly have scanned it more keenly; as
     it was, they surveyed the wide landscape contentedly, but with no particular enthusiasm. On
     every side of them were the rounded uplands—a table-land gently swelling and cleft here and
     there by wooded valleys. On their right was the deep cleft from which they had mounted through
     the woods; and before them the ground dropped sharply to the edge of a cliff, the boundary of a
     wider cleft running at right angles to their own green valley of silence. It was along this
     wider cleft that the railway ran, the little branch line that to-morrow (so they thought) was
     to take them on the first stage of their journey. From their perch on the hill-top they could
     see the three ribbons of dark track, white road and shadowed river which between them filled
     the valley. The wall of rock jutted forward on their left, hiding, as they knew, the wayside
     railway station at which they had arrived and the cluster of neat houses beside it; to the
     right again there was a bend no less sharp—and between the two a stretch of empty road.
"It's very pretty," said Griselda, yawning and fanning herself, "but I wish it wasn't quite
     so hot. I suppose there's nothing left to drink?"
William was sorry there wasn't—they had finished the last drop at lunch. Griselda sighed,
     stretched herself out on her elbow, with her face towards the eastern bluff, and saw coming
     round it a group of three or four horsemen—little toy-like horses, carrying little toy men past
     trees that looked like bushes. They were moving quickly; the toy-like horses were cantering on
     the white ribbon of road. Griselda pointed them out to William, and the pair leaned forward to
     watch them pass, hundreds of feet below.
"They're scampering along," she said; "they must be in a hurry. What funny little things they
     look from here—like insects! They'll be out of sight in a minute—no, they've stopped.... I
     believe they're turning back."
The funny little things had halted simultaneously at the foot of the jutting cliff which hid
     the village and the station from the eyes of William and Griselda. As Griselda had said, in
     another moment they would have been round it and out of sight, and fifty more yards or so
     beyond the bend would have brought them to the outskirts of the village. Instead, they halted
     and drew together for an instant; then one funny little thing, detaching himself from the
     group, scampered backwards by the road he had come, and continued scampering till he rounded
     the eastward bluff. His insects of companions remained grouped where he had left them, their
     horses shifting backwards and forwards on the white surface of the road.
"They're waiting for him to come back," Griselda concluded idly, "I expect they've forgotten
     something."
What they had forgotten proved to be a column of horsemen curving in swift and orderly
     fashion round the foot of the eastward bluff. It came on, a supple and decorative line, bending
     with the bend and straightening as the valley straightened.
"Soldiers," said William, with the orthodox accent of contempt—following with a pleasure he
     would not for worlds have admitted the sinuous windings of the troop. There is in the orderly
     movement of men an attraction which few can resist; it appealed even to his elementary sense of
     the rhythmic, and he, like Griselda, bent forward to watch and to listen to the distant clatter
     of hoofs echoed back from the walls of the valley. As the horsemen swung out of sight round the
     westward bluff and the clatter of hoof-beats deadened, he held up a finger, and Griselda asked,
     "What is it?"
"Guns," he said. "Cannon—don't you hear them?"
She did; a soft, not unpleasing thud, repeated again and again, and coming down the breeze
     from the northward.
"It must be manoeuvres," he explained. "That's what those soldiers are doing. I expect it's
     what they call the autumn manoeuvres."
"Playing at murder," Griselda commented, producing the orthodox sigh. She had heard the
     phrase used by a pacifist orator in the Park and considered it apt and telling. "What a waste
     of time—and what a brutalizing influence on the soldiers themselves! Ah, if only women had a
     say in national affairs!" ... and she made the customary glib oration on her loved and familiar
     text. Before it was quite finished, William held up his finger again—needlessly, for Griselda
     had stopped short on her own initiative. This time it was a crackle of sharp little shots, not
     far away and softened like the sound of the heavier guns, but comparatively close at hand and,
     if their ears did not deceive them, just beyond the westward bluff.
"They're pretending to fight in the village," Griselda said. "How silly! Firing off guns and
     making believe to shoot people."
"Militarism," William assented, "is always silly." And he, in his turn, enlarged on his
     favourite text, the impossibility of international warfare, owing to the ever-growing
     solidarity of the European working-classes—his little homily being punctuated here and there by
     a further crackle from below. When he had enlarged sufficiently and Griselda had duly agreed,
     he returned as it were to private life and suggested:
"If you're feeling more rested, shall we make a start? It's cooler under the trees."
They started, accordingly, on their homeward way, which was even longer than the route they
     had taken in the morning: one little wood path was very like another and they managed to take a
     wrong turning, bear too much to the right and make a considerable detour. When the cottage came
     in sight they were both thirsty, and secretly relieved that their last excursion was over.
"We'll put on the spirit-lamp and have some tea," Griselda announced as they pushed open the
     door. "Oh dear! it's lovely to think we shall be in London so soon. How I would love a
     strawberry ice! Where's the match-box?"
It was not until the match-box was found and the spirit-lamp kindled that William discovered
     on the kitchen table a mystery in the shape of a document. It was an unimposing looking
     document, not over clean, indicted in pencil on the reverse of the half-sheet of paper on which
     William that morning had written his announcement of "Sorti." Like William's
     announcement, the communication was in French, of a kind—presumably uneducated French if one
     judged by the writing; and like William the author of the communication (in all likelihood
     Madame Peys) had placed it in the centre of the table and crowned it with a saucer before
     leaving.
"I suppose it must be for us," William remarked doubtfully. "I can't make out a word of
     it—can you?"
"Of course not," Griselda returned with a spice of irritation—she was tired and her boots
     hurt her. "I couldn't read that ridiculous writing if it was English. It's that silly old
     woman, Madame Peys, I suppose; but what is the good of her writing us letters when she knows we
     can't read them?"
"Perhaps," William suggested, "it's to say she won't be able to cook our supper
     to-night?"
"Very likely," his wife agreed, the spice of irritation still more pronounced. "If that's it,
     we shall have to do with eggs—we used up the cold meat for sandwiches at lunch, and there's
     nothing else in the house. We'd better go round to the farm when we've had our tea and find out
     what she wants—stupid old thing! Whether she comes here or not, we must see her to get the bill
     and order the boy for the morning. But I don't mean to move another step till I've had my
     tea."
