<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>CHAPTER X</t:head>
<t:p>With the conviction that no one was heeding his comings and goings, a certain amount of
     assurance came back to William Tully, and as the way cleared before him he set off down the
     street without any attempt at concealment. By house to house visitation he sought for his wife
     through the village; it was there she had been taken from him, and he thrust back the deadly
     suspicion that she need not have remained in the place where she had disappeared from his
     sight.</t:p>
<t:p>There was not a closed door in the length of the street, and nowhere was his entrance barred;
     the call to arms had temporarily cleared the houses of the invaders quartered in them, and he
     ran from one doorway to another unhindered, calling on Griselda as he entered, looking into
     every room, and then out to repeat the process. The two first houses were empty from garret to
     cellar, but with signs of having been left, recently and hurriedly, by the soldiers billeted
     therein; odds and ends of military kit were scattered about, chairs overturned and left lying;
     and in one room, a kitchen, on a half-extinguished fire, a blackened frizzle of meat in a
     frying-pan filled the air with a smell of burning. The third house he thought likewise empty;
     downstairs there was the same litter—overthrown furniture and food half eaten on the table; but
     opening the door of an upper room he came on a woman with three children. The woman started to
     her feet as the door opened, a child hugged to her bosom and other two clinging to her skirt;
     and William had a passing impression of a plump, pallid face with lips apart and wide, wet
     eyes, half-imploring and half-defiant. One of the children was crying—its mouth was rounded in
     a roar—but you heard nothing of its vigorous plaint for the louder din without. William made a
     gesture that he meant to be reassuring, shut the door and ran back into the street.</t:p>
<t:p>He went in and out desperately, like a creature hunted or hunting; and, having drawn blank in
     house after house, the deadly thought refused to be thrust and kept under. If they had taken
     her away, she might be ... anywhere! East or west, gone in any direction, and leaving no clue
     for her following. Anywhere in a blind incomprehensible world, where men killed men and might
     was right, and life, as he knew it from his childhood up, had ended in an orgy of devilry! He
     went on running from house to house, while shells screamed and burst and guns clattered by, and
     no man gave heed to his running or the tumult and torture of his fears. Upstairs and down and
     out again—upstairs and down and out.</t:p>
<t:p>He was nearing the end of the street when he found her at last; in the upper back room of a
     little white house some yards beyond the building in flames, and not far from the spot where
     they had seen the hostages die. She was alone and did not move when he flung the door open;
     crouched in a corner with her head on her knees, she neither saw nor heard him. For an instant
     it seemed to him that his strength would fail him for gladness, and he staggered and held to
     the door; as the giddiness passed he ran to her, babbling inaudible relief, and pulled the
     hands from her face. He had an instant's glimpse of it, white and tear-marked, with swollen
     lips and red eyes; then, as his arms went round her and he had her up from the floor, it went
     down on his shoulder and was hidden. He felt her clinging to him, trembling against him,
     sobbing against him while he held her—and all his soul was a passion of endearment and
     thankfulness.... So for a minute or two—perhaps longer—they clung to each other, reunited:
     until William, his sense of their peril returning, sought to urge his wife to the door.</t:p>
<t:p>She came with him for a step or two, her head still on his shoulder; then, suddenly, she
     shivered and wrestled in his arms, thrust him from her, rushed back to the end of the room and
     leaned against it, shaking with misery. Her arm was raised over her hidden face and pressed
     against the wall; and he saw what he had not seen before, that the sleeve was torn and the
     flesh near the wrist bruised and reddened. He saw also—his eyes being opened—that it was not
     only her hair that was tumbled; all her dress was disordered and awry. There was another tear
     under the armpit where the sleeve had given way and the white of her underlinen showed through
     the gap.... His heart cried out to him that she had struggled merely as a captive, had been
     restrained by brute force from escaping—but his own eyes had seen that she turned from him as
     if there was a barrier between them, as if there was something to hide that yet she wished him
     to know.... For a moment he fought with the certainty, and then it came down on him like a
     storm: for once in his life his imagination was vivid, and he saw with the eyes of his mind as
     clearly as with the eyes of his body. All the details, the animal details, her cries and her
     pitiful wrestlings; and the phrase "licentious soldiery" personified in the face of the man who
     had been Griselda's gaoler. Round and roughly good-humoured in repose with black eyebrows and a
     blue-black chin.... He caught her by the hands and said something to her—jerked out words that
     stammered and questioned—and she sobbed and turned her face from him again.... After that he
     could not remember what he felt or how long he stood in the middle of the room, oblivious of
     danger and staring at her heaving shoulders and the tumbled hair that covered them; but it
     seemed to him that he talked and moved his hands and hated—and did not know what to do.</t:p>
<t:p>In the end there must have come to him some measure of helpless acquiescence, or perhaps he
     was quieted and taken out of himself by the need of giving help to Griselda. After how long he
     knew not he found himself once more with his arms around her; she let him take her hand, he
     kissed it and stroked her poor hair. This time she came with him when he led her to the door,
     and they went down the stairway together. Near the street door she hesitated and halted, and he
     saw she had something to say.</t:p>
<t:p>"Where are we going?" she asked, with her lips to his ear. "Can we get away?"</t:p>
<t:p>He told her he thought so, that now was the time when they might slip away unnoticed—trying
     to encourage her by the assumption of a greater confidence than he felt. Fortune favoured them,
     however, and the assumption of confidence was justified; though the bombardment had slackened
     as suddenly as it had begun, the remnant of German soldiery left in the place was still too
     much occupied with its own concerns to interfere with a couple of civilians seeking safety in
     the rear of the fire-zone, and no one paid any heed to them as they made their way along the
     street. They turned inevitably westward—away from the guns—down the road they had come that
     morning: two hunted, dishevelled little figures, keeping well to the wall and glancing over
     their shoulders. The crush of wagons, of guns and men, had moved forward and out of the
     village, which, for the moment, seemed clear of all but non-combatants—save for the ubiquitous
     cyclist who dashed backwards and forwards in his dust. An ambulance was discharging its load at
     a building whence waved the Red Cross, and near at hand, but out of sight, a battery was
     thudding regularly; but of the few uniformed figures in the street itself there was none whose
     business it was to interest himself in their movements. They hurried on, clinging to each other
     and hugging the wall—except when a heap of fallen brickwork, a derelict vehicle or other
     obstacle forced them out into the road.</t:p>
<t:p>They were almost at the entry of the village when they came upon such an obstacle: the upper
     part of one of the endmost houses had evidently been struck by a shell, for a large slice of
     roof and outside wall had crumbled to the pathway below. It had crumbled but recently, since
     the dust was still clouding thickly above the ruin and veiling the roadway beyond it; hence, as
     they skirted its borders, it was not until he was actually upon them that they were aware of a
     motor-cyclist speeding furiously out of the dusk. The roar of the battery a few yards away had
     drowned the whirr of his machine, and Griselda was almost under it before she had warning of
     its coming. The stooping rider yelled and swerved, but not enough to avoid her; she went down,
     flung sideways, while the cyclist almost ran on to the heap of rubble on his right—then,
     recovering his balance, dashed forward and was lost in the dusk. Save for that momentary swerve
     and stagger, he had passed like a bolt on his errand, leaving Griselda crumpled in the road at
     William's feet. To his mind, no doubt, a mishap most luckily avoided. Griselda lay without
     moving, her face to the dust, and for one tortured moment William thought the life beaten out
     of her; but when he raised her, her lips moved, as if in a moan, and as he dragged her for
     safety to the side of the road she turned her head on his arm. He laid her down while he ran
     for water from the river; panted to its brim, soaked his handkerchief for lack of a cup,
     brought it back and pressed it to her forehead. Her eyes, when she opened them, were glazed
     with pain and her lips drawn tightly to her teeth; when he wanted to raise her to a sitting
     position she caught his hand thrust it from her and lay with her white face working. So she
     lay, for minutes that seemed hours, with her husband kneeling beside her.... Men passed them
     but stayed not; and once, when William looked up, a car was speeding by with helmeted officers
     inside it—too intent on their own hasty business of death to have so much as a glance to spare
     for a woman in agony of bodily pain and a man in agony of mind.</t:p>
<t:p>The night had come down before Griselda was able to move. With its fall the near-by battery
     was silenced and the distant thunder less frequent; so that William was able to hear her when
     she spoke and asked him to lift her. He sobbed for joy as he lifted her, gently and trembling
     lest he hurt her; she sat leaning on his arm, breathing painfully and telling him in jerks that
     it was her side that pained her most—her left side and her left arm, but most of all her side.
     At first she seemed dazed and conscious only of her sufferings—whimpered about them pitifully
     with intervals of silence—but after ten minutes or so she caught his sleeve and tugged it.</t:p>
<t:p>"Let's get away. Help me up!"</t:p>
<t:p>He suggested that she should rest a little longer, but she urged him with trembling, "Let's
     get away!" and he had perforce to raise her. In spite of the fever for flight that had taken
     possession of her she cried out as he helped her to her feet and stood swaying with her eyes
     shut and her teeth bitten hard together. He would have lain her down again, but she signed a
     "No, no!" at the attempt and gripped at his shoulder to steady herself; then, after a moment,
     guided his arm round her body, so that he could hold her without giving unnecessary pain.</t:p>
<t:p>"You mustn't press my side—I can't bear it. But if you put your hand on my shoulder——"</t:p>
<t:p>They moved away from the village at a snail's pace, Griselda leaning heavily on her husband.
     Behind them at first was the red light from burning houses; but as they crawled onwards the
     darkness of the valley closed in on them until, in the sombre shadow of the cliff, William
     could only distinguish his wife's face as a whitish patch upon his shoulder. When she groaned,
     as she did from time to time, he halted to give her relief, but she would never allow him to
     stand for more than a minute or two; after a few painful breaths there would come the tug of
     her fingers at his coat that was the sign to move forward again. Once or twice she whispered to
     know if any one were coming after them, and he could feel her whole body a-quiver with fear at
     the thought.</t:p>
<t:p>Barred in by cliff to right and river to left, they kept perforce to the road—or, rather, to
     the turf that bordered it. The traffic on the road itself had not ceased with the falling of
     night; cars were coming up and guns were coming up and the valley was alive with their
     rumble—and at every passing Griselda shrank and her fingers shivered in their grip upon
     William's sleeve.</t:p>
<t:p>"Can't we get away from them?" she whispered at last. "Right away and hide—can't we turn off
     the road?"</t:p>
<t:p>He said helplessly that he did not know where, until they reached the entrance to their
     valley. "It's all cliff—and the river on the other side."</t:p>
<t:p>She had known it without asking; there was nothing for it but to drag herself along. To both
     the distance was never-ending; Griselda's terror of recapture communicated itself to her
     husband, and he shivered even as she did at the rattle of a passing car. Instinctively they
     kept to the shadow, stumbling in its blackness over the uneven ground below the cliff. Once,
     when a couple of patrolling horsemen halted near them in the roadway, they crouched and held
     their breath during an eternity of dreadful seconds while they prayed that they had not been
     noticed. It seemed to William that his heart stopped beating when one of the horsemen walked
     his beast a yard or two nearer and flashed a light into their faces; but the man, having
     surveyed them, turned away indifferently and followed his comrade down the road. That was just
     before they came to the gap in the heights that led into the valley of silence.</t:p>
<t:p>As they entered it for the last time, in both their minds was the thought that they might
     find it barred to them; and the beating of their hearts was loud in their ears as they crept
     into its friendly shadow.</t:p>
<t:p>"The woods," Griselda whispered.</t:p>
<t:p>They turned into the woods and took cover; and, with a yard or two, the blackness under the
     trees had closed in on them, blotting out all things from sight. They halted because they could
     see to walk no further.</t:p>
<t:p>"Let me down," Griselda said—and her husband knew by the gasp in her voice that she was at
     the end of her powers of endurance. He explored with an outstretched hand for a tree trunk and
     lowered her gently to the ground with her back supported against it; she panted relief as he
     sat down beside her and groped for her fingers in the darkness.... So they sat holding to each
     other and enveloped in thickest night.</t:p>
<t:p>The guns had died down altogether, and the rumble from the road, though almost continuous was
     dulled—so that William could hear his wife's uneven breathing and the stealthy whisper of the
     trees. He sat holding Griselda's hand and staring into the blackness, a man dazed and
     confounded; who yesterday was happy lover and self-respecting citizen and to-day had suffered
     stripes, been slave and fugitive, learned the evil wrought on his wife.</t:p>
<t:p>Thinking on it afterwards, he wondered that he had closed an eye; yet he had sat in the
     darkness but a very few minutes when, swiftly and without warning, he fell into a heavy
     sleep.</t:p>
</t:div>