<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>CHAPTER XV</t:head>
<t:p>There were many parallels to the case and conversion of William Tully in the first few weeks
     of the war. There is, and always will be, the self-centred temperament that can shut its eyes
     to the fact and tread the pathways of the paradise of fools, even if it treads them alone; but
     on the whole humanity is reasonable and, given a fact, however surprising and savagely
     unpleasant, accepts it because it must.</t:p>
<t:p>Those who struggled hardest against the acceptance of the War-Fact of 1914 were, naturally
     enough, those who had fiery little battles of their own to fight, and whose own warfare was
     suddenly rendered null and incompetent by a sudden diversion of energy and interest in the face
     of the national danger. The war was the successful rival of their own, their sectional strife,
     overshadowing its importance and sucking the life from its veins. Hence instinctively they
     sneered at it and strove to ignore its existence; hating it as a minor and incompetent artist
     may hate the greater professional rival who sings or acts him off the stage. Only by some such
     reasoning can one account for the fact that the aggressive and essentially militarist type of
     political enthusiast so often runs to pacifism where the quarrels of others are concerned.</t:p>
<t:p>But for the bitter mischance of a honeymoon spent in the Forest of Arden and the consequences
     thereby brought about, such would, very certainly, have been the mental attitude of William
     Tully in the August of 1914. His own battles would have absorbed his aggressive instincts, and,
     never having seen a shot fired in anger, he would have continued, for quite a long time, to
     think of other battles as enlarged street riots which were thoroughly enjoyed by the
     bloodthirsty soldiery who provoked them. He would have pooh-poohed the possibility of a war
     until the war actually broke out; and then, insisting that it was avoidable and should not have
     been, have clung angrily to his customary interests and done his small energetic best to keep
     his comrades from straying into that wider and bloodier field where they and their services
     would be lost to the sectional conflict. Such, very certainly, would have been his course of
     action had he made his wedding journey to Torquay. Fate and not temperament had willed it that
     he should be driven to enlist under the rival banner of nationality; but there were others of
     his kidney whom fate had not driven so brutally, and who, unable to effect, as William had
     done, a rapid transfer of allegiance and antagonisms, struggled desperately to uphold, in
     despite of war, their partially deserted standard. Of such was Faraday, dogged and fiercely
     indefatigable; though the man had soul and brain enough to feel the ground rock beneath him.
     His ignorance of European politics was a thought less profound than William's, but sufficiently
     profound to have bred in him a complete disbelief in the possibility of European war; hence his
     surprise at the international earthquake was almost as great as that of his former disciple.
     When the unbelievable happened he, as was but natural, was angry—all men are angry when the
     habit of years is interfered with; and in the first flush of his annoyance ascribed the
     falsification of his every prediction not to his own blundering, but to the sins of those who
     did not think as he did. Those who prophesied war—so he argued—had prophesied what they
     desired.... All the same, he was not, like William, devoid of the imaginative faculty; but the
     war was as yet a great way off and his hatred of the Government of his own country was real.
     With time he, too, came to understand that a people may have other foes than those of its own
     household and be threatened with death from without; when he was called up under the
     Conscription Act he went without protest, made an excellent soldier and died fighting in a
     night raid near Hulluch; but in the beginning the habit and association of years was too strong
     for him and his bitter dislike of his neighbour overpowered his fear of the German. During the
     first few weeks of the war he held peace meetings at considerable personal risk, which, as
     became a good fighter, he took, even with enjoyment; distributed printed appeals to pacifist
     and anti-British sentiment and wrote passionately, if with less than his usual clarity, in
      <t:hi>The Torch</t:hi>. He could not in honesty bring himself to defend every action of his
     country's enemies and was conscious of occasional difficulty and a sense of thin ice underneath
     him; at the same time it was against his tradition and principles to admit that the
     statesmanship of the land he was born in could ever have right on its side. Tradition and
     principles might have won hands down, making him ardently and happily pro-German, had it not
     been for the complication introduced by the attitude of other nations which, foreign even as
     Germany was foreign, had chosen to range themselves with England. Hence a difficulty in
     indiscriminate condemnation and a momentary confusion of thought and outlook of which Faraday
     himself was quite clear-brained enough to be conscious; it irritated him and he was sensible of
     failure and uncertainty.</t:p>
<t:p>On the day that William arrived in London and was refused for the British Army, Faraday held
     a small meeting in a hall in a Bloomsbury side street. The object of the meeting was to
     consider suitable methods of influencing for the better the existing and lamentable condition
     of popular opinion; the gathering was not open to the general public, only the initiated being
     present. Some thirty to forty of the initiated, chiefly secretaries, chairmen and other branch
     officials of the advanced socialist group of which Faraday was leading light and president—for
     the most part men, but with a sprinkling of women among them. They had been summoned together
     by letter and word of mouth; the meeting was private and consultative, described as for
     sympathizers only, and held at the headquarters of the Central London Branch—a large room,
     sparsely furnished with chairs and a platform, in the neighbourhood of Tottenham Court Road.
     One of the more muscular members of the branch kept watch and ward in the passage outside the
     hall, scrutinizing the comrades as they neared the door, lest any uninitiated person or
     disturber of peace should attempt to gain entry with the faithful; he was thrilled with a vague
     and grandiose conviction that the meeting was of perilous importance, passed in his
     familiars—they were all his familiars—with a mysterious nod and compared himself to a sentinel
     on duty in a post of extreme danger. He was a young man domiciled in the Hampstead Garden
     Suburb, with uncut hair, a flowing tie and a latent, if hitherto undeveloped sense of humour;
     and a year or two later, when the Army had claimed him, and he stood in the Ypres salient, in a
     post of extreme danger, he grinned unhappily between the shell-bursts as the night of the
     meeting came back to him.</t:p>
<t:p>Among his thirty or forty familiars he passed in William Tully—who had come to the hall
     mechanically, scarce knowing where his steps were guiding him. No wind of the meeting had come
     to him, but the place was one of his haunts—the Central London Branch, of which he was
     chairman, assembled there on business once a week. Further, it was used as the address of the
     Branch, and he was accustomed to call there almost daily for his official letters or the
     transaction of small official business. Thus it happened, at the close of a bewildered day,
     that he turned to it almost by instinct.</t:p>
<t:p>Perhaps it was a sense of homelessness that drove him to its open doors—for it was not until
     well towards evening that he had summoned up courage to enter his own dwelling, the little flat
     he had not yet lived in, made ready for himself and Griselda. If there had been anywhere else
     to go perhaps he never would have entered it; but his bachelor lodging, he knew, was let to a
     new tenant, and he had not money enough in his pocket to pay for a lodging elsewhere. His day
     had been spent on foot; after his refusal at the recruiting station he had walked he knew not
     whither—here, there, through street after street, that he might not stop and think; and when,
     in the late afternoon, he found himself sitting on the turf of Primrose Hill, he could not, for
     the life of him, remember the route by which he had reached it. Sheer weariness of body drove
     him to shelter, and half an hour later he was dragging his feet up the stairs that led to the
     flat.</t:p>
<t:p>The woman who was to "do" for himself and Griselda had been installed on the premises for
     some days past; since the outbreak of war she had been in hourly expectation of the arrival of
     her master and mistress and in some perturbation at the continued lack of news from them. As
     William was about to walk past the door she had opened to him she stayed him with an
     inquisitive question—he could not remember the form it took but knew that it must have referred
     to Griselda's absence, for he told her abruptly that his wife had died in France. She threw up
     her hands with a screaming exclamation as he hurried past her to shut himself into the
     bedroom.</t:p>
<t:p>There, afraid of her curious sympathy and questions, he shut and locked himself in; with the
     poignant loneliness of the brand-new furniture that he and Griselda had chosen and lovingly
     admired; with the poignant company of Griselda's photograph, smiling self-consciously from the
     centre of the mantelpiece and set in an ornate silver frame that was one of her wedding
     presents. He held it in his hands till the tears blinded him, kissed it sobbing and laid it
     face downwards.</t:p>
<t:p>The "general," burning with inquisitive sympathy, induced him, after one or two unsuccessful
     attempts, to open the door to her knocking; pressed on him, in spite of denials, a scratch meal
     of tea and poached eggs, and hovered round while he ate it. As befitted the occasion she held
     her apron to her eyes while she extracted as much as she could in the way of information.
     Later, as she washed up in the kitchen, she heard him moving from one tiny room to
     another—consumed with a restless misery and a restless wonder as to what he should do with his
     life. Still later she heard him go out again; though he had hidden away the self-conscious
     photograph, thrusting it out of sight into a drawer, the brand-new furniture was always there
     and always waiting for Griselda. The moment came when he could no longer suffer its company and
     went out into the street to avoid it. Other purpose in walking he had none—and thus it happened
     that, mechanically and without intent, he drifted into the Bloomsbury side-street where Faraday
     held his meeting.</t:p>
<t:p>The important doorkeeper would have greeted him with more than a nod—would gladly, in fact,
     have detained him after his four weeks' absence to exchange comments and views on the European
     situation; but William, in entering, made no response to his "Hallo, back again!" which it may
     be he did not even hear. He walked straight past the sentinel and into the bare familiar
     room—where everything, from the seats to their occupants, was just as it had been and where
     every face was known to him. Time, for a moment, turned back in its traces and yesterday
     unrolled before his eyes. He gazed at it and sat down slowly—by himself in the last row of
     chairs.... Edwardes, the Central London secretary, was hugging his ankle as he always hugged
     it, and Mrs. Jay-Blenkinsop, the formidable treasurer of the Golder's Green branch, frowned
     through her pince-nez at the speaker with her chin uplifted as of old, wore the same capacious
     sandals—her crossed knees showed them—and the same cold-gravy-coloured robe. And her son, young
     Jay-Blenkinsop, as his habit was, sprawled sideways on one chair and curled his long limbs
     round another. It was all as it had been; and Faraday, on the platform, was speaking with the
     accents of yesterday.</t:p>
<t:p>The important doorkeeper was not the only comrade who had noticed William's return: one or
     two heads were turned as he came in, but for the most part the audience was intent on the words
     of the speaker. The heads that turned made some sign of pleased recognition to which William
     responded automatically, unknowing that he did so. From his seat near the door his eyes
     wandered slowly over the platform, the hall and its occupants—slowly and with a dull and
     detached curiosity. What he saw there and heard was unreal, like a scene in an unconvincing
     play; he had a sense of looking at these people from a great way off, of hearing their voices
     from a distance. Something separated and held him removed from them.... He had great difficulty
     in giving his attention to what the speaker was saying; yet in the old days Faraday had always
     stirred him and to-night he was speaking well.</t:p>
<t:p>From thirty to forty convinced adherents assembled at a private conference are not the
     material upon which a public orator usually throws away his best endeavours; but Faraday that
     night was speaking not so much to his audience as to himself. Unadmitted, even to his secret
     soul, he had great and fierce need of conviction; it was with his own doubts that he wrestled,
     at his own head that he flung both his jeers and his arguments. He was of a finer because more
     intelligent mould than the Edwardeses and Jay-Blenkinsops who heard him and who were still
     thinking of the European tragedy as a red herring drawn by the cunning politician across the
     path of progress. Not for him was their happy imperviousness to the new idea, and, looking down
     from his platform on their assembled faces, it may have struck him, not pleasantly, that these
     people were in part of his making; they were, at any rate, the product of a system of which he,
     in common with politicians of every creed, had not scrupled to make full use.</t:p>
<t:p>Be that as it may, he spoke feelingly and well that night; far better and more feelingly than
     was needed by the numbers, the attitude and calibre of his audience, which was comfortably and
     stubbornly determined to agree with him before he opened his mouth. He had not come to the
     meeting with intent to be so lengthy and urgent; he had planned to be nothing more than brief
     and business-like, to give and invite suggestions for a vigorous prosecution of the anti-war
     campaign; but when he rose to open the discussion he was carried away by his own doubts and
     emotions; and the "few remarks" he had thought to make flared out into a veritable speech. He
     fought with and poured scorn on himself in the name of others, rallying his feebleness with
     argument and sneering at his own hesitations. Thus he spoke eloquently and deserved the
     applause which greeted him when he sat down.</t:p>
<t:p>Edwardes followed him, in response to the invitation for suggestions: a little be-spectacled
     Labour man whose ideal was a world of committees. There had been something alive about
     Faraday's outpouring; it was the speech of a man who, however resentfully, understood that the
     world had moved. But as Edwardes quacked earnestly about branch propaganda as an antidote to
     militarism and a means of diffusing the international idea, the sense of unreality descended
     again upon William. Branch propaganda—little leaflets and meetings—when guns made a pulp of
     flesh and blood, and men were being shot against walls! Resolutions in minute-books against
     wrongs like Griselda's and his own! For the first time for many days he felt a desire to laugh,
     and, if it had not been for his sense of the distant unreality of the proceedings, perhaps he
     would have been moved to actual expression of perverted and unmirthful mirth.</t:p>
<t:p>It was young Jay-Blenkinsop who made the proceedings real to him; and, but for his
     intervention at the end of the discussion, it is probable that William himself would have taken
     no part in it. He would have listened for a little, perhaps to the end, and then crept out to
     his loneliness; but Jay-Blenkinsop roused him and swept him out of himself ... Edwardes quacked
     earnestly for ten minutes or so: the aggrieved outpourings of a soul to which the really
     serious fact of the war was that it had caused a certain amount of backsliding and even
     desertion amongst the weaker brethren of his branch; and when he sat down, after a moment of
     silence, Jay-Blenkinsop rose to his feet. (In the dark ages that had ended a week ago William
     thought highly of Edgar Jay-Blenkinsop, esteeming him a youth of great promise.) With his hands
     in his pockets, his broad shoulders lolled against the wall and his hair, as usual, drooped
     over an eyebrow, he drawled out fine scorn upon the leaders of the Labour Party for their
     treachery to the cause of the People and their lack of the sense of Brotherhood. There was no
     particular purport in his vaguely scathing remarks, which (the meeting being nominally for
     business purposes) might well have been ruled out of order; but he was enjoying the sound of
     his own full voice and his mother gazed up at him admiringly.</t:p>
<t:p>It was more himself than his vague remarks that made William flare and see red—his six feet
     of conceited boyhood propped sprawlingly against the wall. As he listened he was gripped with a
     sudden hatred of Jay-Blenkinsop, a hatred that had its roots in envy of his physical
     perfections; it was for lack of that broad deep chest and those long strong limbs that the
     recruiting officer would have none of him ... and a muscular boy, a potential soldier, lolled
     hands in pockets and cracked ignorant jests at men who knew better than he did, at the agony of
     such as himself. As the young man drawled onward William breathed fast and thickly and clutched
     at the chair in front of him: till Jay-Blenkinsop, having sufficiently scarified the official
     representatives of Labour, went on to some smartly turned gibes at the recruiting campaign and
     the gulls who were caught by its appeals. One of his sarcasms brought him the ready laugh he
     had counted on—and something on which he had not counted; at the tail of the laugh came,
     imperative and raucous, the order, "Sit down, you young fool!"</t:p>
<t:p>Every head in the room went round with indignation to William—whom most of the gathering,
     Faraday included, now noticed for the first time. He was on his feet, stiffened and pallid with
     passion; but after the cry that had cut short Jay-Blenkinsop he stood silent, with his lips
     apart and his hands clutching at a chair-back. His fingers knotted and worked as they clutched
     and his mouth was twisted and quivering; he stood like an animal backed into a corner, defying
     the astounded eyes and the open incredulous mouths of those who had once been his comrades ...
     Most incredulous of all was the mouth of Mrs. Jay-Blenkinsop, who gaped in amazement at the
     unprovoked attack on her son.</t:p>
<t:p>"May I ask——?" began Edgar Jay-Blenkinsop, less slowly and languidly than usual—whereat
     William, hearing the silence broken, also found words to his tongue.</t:p>
<t:p>"You may ask," he interrupted, "oh yes, you may ask! Anything you like. But for God's sake
     don't lay down the law and make ignorant assertions—for God's sake don't do that. You mustn't
     lay down the law until you know something, until you've really tried to find out. Then,
     perhaps, you'll have a right to speak; now when I hear you, I—I——" From sheer sense of the
     inadequacy of words his voice tailed huskily away; then, with an odd little snarl at his
     auditors, he burst out savagely afresh: "You child, you great impudent jackanapes! You stand
     there and dare to make jokes about the hell that other men have burned in. The flames and the
     blood and the guns and people dying in the road. You talk blank foolery and laugh about it—you
     laugh and turn up your nose. You think you're clever—and enlightened—and it sickens me, sickens
     me to hear you!"</t:p>
<t:p>He finished on a note that was almost a scream, and they looked at him aghast and
     dumfoundered. It was his face that held them even more than his disconcerting words—all but
     Edgar Jay-Blenkinsop, who, pricked in his vanity, would have accepted the challenge and started
     again had not Faraday silenced him with a turn of the head and a gesture. Still more pricked in
     his vanity he slid to a chair, muttering sulkily and red to the neck.</t:p>
<t:p>"Tully——" began Faraday with reproof in his voice—but Tully defied even his mentor. Not
     savagely and with contempt, as he had defied and decried Jay-Blenkinsop, but as one who had a
     right to be heard.</t:p>
<t:p>"He mustn't talk like that till he knows something. It's child's talk—ridiculous babble. I
     know what I'm saying—I've come from it—and I've a right to tell him what I know. Not one of you
     here has seen what I have—you're just guessing. When a shell bursts ... I've seen a man with
     his legs like red jelly and a horse..." he choked at the memory. "That's being a soldier—let
     him fight and he'll find it out. Now he thinks it's what he said just now—a sort of game that
     they like. Everything he said was mean little nonsense—how dare you listen to it and laugh at
     his silly little jokes? What's the good of saying that it shouldn't happen? Of course it
     shouldn't happen—we all know that—of course it shouldn't happen, but it does. And you can't
     stop it with sneers about soldiers and Kitchener.... It's hell and the mouth of hell—I've seen
     it. He says he wouldn't lift a finger to keep them out. Do you know why he says that? It's
     because he can't imagine what it means. I would. I'd die to keep them out, because I've seen
     ... I've seen a man shot—not a soldier, just an ordinary man—put against a wall and shot while
     his wife howled like a dog. Two men—and their wives standing by. They might do that to him if
     they came—has he ever thought of that?—while his mother howled like a dog." He shot out a
     quivering finger at the open-mouthed Mrs. Jay-Blenkinsop. "And his women—would he let them do
     as they liked with his women? They would if they came here—he can take my word for it they
     would. Would he ask them in politely and shake hands and give them drinks and let them? ... If
     they came, people would run from them, leaving everything they had—beggars. Would he like to be
     driven and beaten and made to work like a slave? I've had that—I've been driven and beaten and
     made to work. And I've run from them and starved and hidden because I was afraid. And my wife
     died—they killed her——"</t:p>
<t:p>There was a gasp, a rustle of movement and a sudden straightening of backs. Every one in the
     room knew Griselda Tully, many quite intimately, and not a few had been at her wedding;
     amazement and wrath against the disturber of the peace gave way to a real consternation, and in
     the silence that followed the momentary rustle William heard Faraday's "Good God!" ... They
     stared at him in dumb consternation, dimly conscious, perhaps, that they were in the presence
     of an eternal fact, and that the little man who stabbed at them with a trembling forefinger was
     the embodiment of that sense of injustice and agony which makes men cry to Heaven for vengeance
     and, Heaven failing them, take the sword and smite for themselves. Dolly Murgatroyd, Griselda's
     bridesmaid, who had twice accompanied Griselda to Holloway, saw and shrank from the reality of
     that tortured revolt which for years she had striven to simulate under the lash of her leaders'
     bombast.... In face of the fact that was William their theories wilted and failed them, and the
     new black suit of their comrade Tully was to them as the writing on the wall at the feast of
     Belshazzar—and came, like that other writing on the wall, at the moment when the evil from
     which they had hidden their faces was an evil actually accomplished. In each man's heart was a
     faint reflection of the amaze that had fallen on William and Griselda when their world first
     crumbled about them.</t:p>
<t:p>The sudden movement, the chairman's exclamation and the abashed silence that followed it
     checked William and brought him to a standstill; speech failed him and he stood with his mouth
     half open while the meeting stared at him motionless. There was a blank period of tension, of
     awkward stillness hi the presence of emotion, and then Faraday coughed uncertainly and moved.
     Probably he intended to say something, perhaps to adjourn the meeting; but his movement and the
     breaking of silence with his cough gave William back his voice and he spoke before Faraday
     began.</t:p>
<t:p>"And they won't take me in the Army. Although my wife has been killed they won't take me in
     the Army. I'm not tall enough; I'm only five foot five, and they won't take me. I've seen my
     wife die—she died in the road—and they refused me when I tried to enlist. If I were only two
     inches taller—God in Heaven, if I were two inches taller!"</t:p>
<t:p>The high, tight voice broke suddenly and he wept with his face in his hands. For the space of
     a painful moment there was no sound in the room but his sobs—no man knowing what to do or where
     to turn his eyes until Faraday came down from the platform. The tread of his feet on the
     gangway broke the spell of embarrassed silence—and chairs were moved softly and the occupants
     looked away from William as Faraday took him very gently by the arm and led him out into the
     street.</t:p>
</t:div>