<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>CHAPTER VII</t:head>
<t:p>Looking back on the morning in the month of August, nineteen hundred and fourteen, when he
     made his first acquaintance with war as the soldier understands it, William Tully realized that
     fear, real fear, was absent from his heart until he witnessed the shooting of the hostages.
     Until that moment he had been unconvinced, and, because unconvinced, unafraid; he had been
     indignant, flustered, physically sore and inconvenienced; but always at the back of his mind
     was the stubborn belief that the pains and indignities endured by himself and his wife would be
     dearly paid for by the perpetrators. He could conceive as yet of no state of society in which
     Law and the bodily immunity of the peaceful citizen was not the ultimate principle; and even
     the sight of a long grey battalion of infantry plodding dustily westward on the road by the
     river had not convinced him of war and the meaning of war. They came on the trudging torrent of
     men as they debouched from the valley on to the main road; and their captors halted them on the
     grass at the roadside until the close grey ranks had passed. William and Griselda were thankful
     for the few minutes' respite and breathing-space; they wiped their hot faces and Griselda made
     ineffectual attempts to tidy her tumbled hair. She was reminded by her pressing need of
     hairpins that they had left their bags on the scene of their misfortune, outside the farmhouse
     gate; they conversed about the loss in undertones, and wondered if the bags would be recovered.
     They were not without hopes, taking into account the loneliness of the neighbourhood.... When
     the battalion, with its tail of attendant grey carts, had passed, Heinz ordered them forward
     again—and they moved on, fifty yards or so behind the last of the grey carts, and trusting that
     their goal was at hand.</t:p>
<t:p>"If they're only taking us as far as the village," Griselda panted hopefully.</t:p>
<t:p>They were—to the familiar little village with its miniature railway station between the river
     and the cliff. The column of infantry plodded dustily through and past it, but Heinz followed
     the rear-guard only halfway down the street before he shouted to his prisoners to halt. They
     halted—with an alacrity born of relief and a sense of the wisdom of prompt obedience to
     orders—before an unpretentious white building with a sentry stationed on either side of the
     door. Heinz swung himself down from his horse and went into the house, leaving William and
     Griselda in charge of his comrades and standing at the side of the road.</t:p>
<t:p>William and Griselda looked about them. They had passed through the place several times and
     were accustomed enough to its usual appearance to be aware of the change that had come over it.
     The rumbling grey carts behind which they had tramped were already at the end of the village;
     they could see all the sunlit length of the street and take stock of the new unfamiliar life
     which filled it from end to end.</t:p>
<t:p>It was a life masculine and military; an odd mixture of iron order and disorder; of soldiers
     on duty and soldiers taking their ease. The street itself was untidy and littered as they had
     never seen it before; its centre had been swept clear, so that traffic might pass unhindered,
     but the sides of the road were strewn with a jetsam of fragmentary lumber. A country cart that
     had lost a wheel sat clumsily in front of the church near a jumble of broken pottery, and a
     chair with its legs in the air was neighboured by trusses of straw. All down the street the
     doors stood widely open—here and there a house with starred or shattered windows looked unkempt
     and forlornly shabby. Beyond shivered panes and occasional litter of damaged crockery and
     furniture there was no sign of actual violence; the encounter that had taken place there—a
     cavalry skirmish between retreating Belgian and advancing German—had left few traces behind
     it.</t:p>
<t:p>The civilians of the village, with hardly an exception, were invisible. The landlord of the
     café was serving his soldier customers, and two labourers were unloading sacks, from a miller's
     dray under the eye of a guard; and when William and Griselda had been waiting for a few minutes
     an old man crossed the road hurriedly from opposite house to house—emerging from shelter like a
     rabbit from its burrow and vanishing with a swift running hobble. As for women, they saw only
     two—whom they were not to forget easily.</t:p>
<t:p>They stood, the two women, a few yards away on the further side of the road; almost opposite
     the door by which Heinz had disappeared and with their eyes continually fixed on it. One—the
     elder—was stout and grey-headed, very neatly dressed in black with a black woollen scarf on her
     shoulders; her hands were folded, meeting on her breast, and every now and then she bent her
     head over them while her lips moved slowly and soundlessly. At such moments she closed her
     eyes, but when she lifted her head again they turned steadily to the door. The woman who stood
     beside her was taller and younger, middle-aged, upright, and angular; she also wore a black
     dress, and above her sharp and yellowish features an unbecoming black hat—a high-crowned hat
     with upstanding and rusty black bows. What struck you about her at the first glance was her
     extreme respectability—in the line of her lean shoulders, in the dowdily conventional hat; at a
     second, the fact that her mouth was a line, so tightly were her lips compressed. She also stood
     with her eyes fixed on the door. William and Griselda looked at the pair curiously; it was odd
     and uncomfortable to see them standing at the side of the road, their clothes dusted by passing
     cars, not moving or speaking to each other.</t:p>
<t:p>For the rest, from end to end of the street there were only soldiers in sight. Soldiers
     taking their noisy ease at the tables outside the café—any number of them crowded round the
     little green tables while the sweating landlord ran to and fro with a jug or a tray of glasses
     and an obvious desire to propitiate. Other soldiers, less noisy, led a string of horses to
     water; and a rigid file of them with rifles grounded, was drawn up on the further side of the
     street not far from the waiting women; some ten or a dozen of motionless helmeted automata,
     with a young officer, a ruddy-faced boy, pacing up and down the road in front of them. Through
     a gap in the row of white houses William and Griselda saw another group of men in their
     shirt-sleeves at work on the railway line—the line that should have taken them to Brussels;
     they seemed to be repairing some damage to the permanent way; and further down the village two
     or three soldier mechanics were busied inquisitively at the bonnet of a heavy grey car drawn up
     at the side of the road. While they waited and watched other heavy grey cars of the same
     pattern rumbled into the street and along it; and motor cycles one after another hooted and
     clanked past them to vanish in a smothering trail of dust.</t:p>
<t:p>In after days William tried vainly to recall what he felt and thought in the long hot minutes
     while they waited for Heinz to reappear and for something to happen. He supposed that it was
     the fiercer sensations of the time that followed which deadened the impressions of the
     half-hour or so during which they stood in the sunny street expecting they knew not what; and
     though he remembered, and remembered vividly, the outward show and manner of the place—its
     dusty road, its swarming soldiers, its passing cars and cycles and the bearing of the two
     silent women—the memory brought with it no hint of his accompanying attitude of mind. All he
     knew was that he had not been seriously alarmed.... He might have recalled his impressions with
     more success had he and Griselda discussed at the time their new and surprising experiences;
     but an attempt to enter into conversation was promptly checked by one of their attendant
     guards. What he actually said was unintelligible, but his manner conveyed his meaning and
     thereafter the captives considered their situation in silence.</t:p>
<t:p>He did not know how long it was before the hostages came out into the street; but he
     remembered—it was his first distinct memory of a vivid personal impression—the instantaneous
     thrill of relief and excitement with which, after their dreary wait, he saw the first signs of
     movement at the sentry-guarded door. A man—a soldier—came out swiftly and went to the
     boy-officer, who thereupon stopped his pacing; there was a clicking of heels, a salute and a
     message rapidly delivered; the boy-officer turned and shouted to his men and, his men moved at
     the word, their rifles going to their shoulders, as if by the impulse of one will. William's
     eye was caught and held by the oiled swiftness, the mechanical simultaneousness of the
     movement; he stared at the line of uniforms, now rigidly inactive again, till a hand from
     behind gripped his collar and impelled him urgently sideways. One of his captors had adopted
     this simple method of informing him that way must be made for those about to issue from the
     door of the sentry-guarded house. He choked angrily and brought up against the wall—to which
     Griselda, taking warning, had hastily backed herself. He was still gasping when the little
     procession came out; a soldier leading it, a couple more with bayonets fixed—two civilians
     walking together—a couple more soldiers with bayonets fixed and last of all an officer, a
     fattish, youngish, moustachioed man whom the sentries stiffened to salute. He came a little
     behind his men, paused on the step and stood there framed in the doorway with his hand resting
     on his sword, the embodiment of conscious authority; the others, the two civilians and their
     guard, went on to the middle of the road. There, in the middle of the road, they also
     halted—the soldiers smartly, the captives uncertainly—and William saw the two civilians
     clearly.</t:p>
<t:p>One was a short and rotund little man who might have been sixty to sixty-five and might have
     been a local tradesman—nearly bald and with drooping moustaches, rather like a stout little
     seal. Essentially an ordinary and unpretentious creature, he was obviously aiming at dignity;
     his chin was lifted at an angle that revealed the measure of the roll of fat that rested on his
     collar, and he walked almost with a strut, as if he were attempting to march. Afterwards
     William remembered that he had seen on the little man's portly stomach some sort of insignia or
     ribbon; at the time it conveyed nothing to him, but he was told later that it was the outward
     token of a mayor. He remembered also that the little man's face was pale, with a sickly
     yellow-grey pallor; and that as he came down the steps with his head held up the drooping
     moustache quivered and the fat chin beneath it twitched spasmodically. There was something
     extraordinarily pitiful about his attempt at a personal dignity which nature had wholly denied
     him; William felt the appeal in it even before he grasped the situation the meaning and need of
     the pose.</t:p>
<t:p>The man who walked on his left hand was taller and some years younger—middle-aged, slightly
     stooping and with slightly grizzled hair and beard. He belonged to an ordinary sedentary type,
     and William, thinking him over later, was inclined to set him down a schoolmaster, or perhaps a
     clerk. He wore steel-rimmed eye-glasses and his black coat was shiny on the back and at the
     elbows; he had none of his fellow's pomposity, and walked dragging his feet and with his eyes
     bent on the ground. He raised them only when, as they halted in the middle of the road, the
     respectable woman in black called out something—one word, perhaps his name—came up to him and
     caught him by the shoulder. He answered her quickly and very briefly—with hardly more than a
     word—and for a second or two after he had spoken she stood quite still, with her hand resting
     on his shoulder. Then, suddenly, her sallow face contorted, her thin mouth writhed and from it
     there came a cry that was too fierce to be called a groan and too hoarse to be called a scream;
     she flung herself forward on the neck of the grizzled man and her lean black arms went round
     it. He tried to speak to her again, but she silenced him by drawing down his head to her
     breast; she held it to her breast and pressed it there; she rocked and swayed a little from
     side to side, fondling the grizzled hair and kissing it to a stream of broken endearment. Her
     grief was animal, alike in its unrestraint and its terrible power of expression; convention
     fell away from her; in her tidy dress and with her dowdy hat slipping to one shoulder she was
     primitive woman crooning over her dying mate.... When she was seized and drawn away from her
     man, her curved fingers clung to his garments. Two soldiers held her and she writhed between
     them choking out a hoarse incoherent appeal to the officer standing in the frame of the doorway
     with his hand on the hilt of his sword; she went on crying herself hoarser as her captors urged
     her further down the street and at last, in mercy to those who looked on, out of sight through
     an open doorway. William had his hands to his ears when the door shut. No one, in spite of the
     persistence of her cries, came out into the street to inquire the cause of her grief; but it
     seemed to William afterwards that he had been aware here and there of furtive faces that
     appeared at upper windows.</t:p>
<t:p>While they forced the dowdy woman away from him her man stood motionless, turned away from
     her with his head bent and his eyes on the ground, so that he started when a soldier came up
     behind him and tapped him sharply on the arm. The soldier—he had stripes on his sleeve and
     seemed a person of authority—held a handkerchief dangling from his hand; and, seeing it, the
     grizzled-haired captive removed his steel-rimmed eyeglasses.</t:p>
<t:p>"Don't look," said William under his breath. "Griselda, don't look."</t:p>
<t:p>For the first time mortal fear had seized him by the throat and shaken him. He knew now that
     he stood before death itself, and the power to inflict death, and his heart was as water within
     him. His wife was beside him—and when he realized (as he did later on with shame) that the
     spasm of terror in those first moments of comprehension had been stronger than the spasm of
     pity, he excused it by the fact of her presence. His fear in its forecast of evil took tangible
     shape. Griselda at his elbow had her eyes and her mouth wide open; she was engrossed,
     fascinated—and he was afraid, most horribly afraid, that in her amazement, her righteous pity,
     she might say or do something that would bring down wrath upon them. He remembered how bold she
     had been in the face of a crowd, how uplifted by sacred enthusiasm! ... He plucked her by the
     sleeve when he whispered to her not to look—but she went on staring, wide-eyed and
     wide-mouthed, for the first time unresponsive to his touch and the sound of his voice.</t:p>
<t:p>They bandaged the eyes of the two prisoners—the rotund pompous little mayor and the man who
     might have been a schoolmaster. All his life William remembered the look of the rotund mayor
     with a bandage covering him from forehead to nose-tip and his grey moustache quivering beneath
     it—a man most pitifully afraid to die, yet striving to die as the situation demanded. And he
     remembered how, at the moment the bandage was knotted on the mayor's head, there stepped up to
     him quietly the stout old woman who had stood praying on the further side of the road with her
     eyes fixed upon the door. She held up a little crucifix and pressed it to the quivering grey
     moustache.... Griselda clutched William by the wrist and he thought she was going to cry
     out.</t:p>
<t:p>"Don't, darling, don't!" he whispered. "Oh, darling, for both our sakes!" ...</t:p>
<t:p>He did not know whether it was his appeal or her own terror and amazement that restrained her
     from speech—but she stood in silence with her fingers tightened on his wrist. He wished she
     would look away, he wished he could look away himself; he tried for an instant to close his
     eyes, but the not-seeing was worse than sight, and he had to open them again. As he opened them
     a car roared by raising a smother of dust; but as the cloud of its passage settled he saw that
     the two blindfolded men were standing with their backs to a blank wall—a yellow-washed,
     eight-foot garden wall with the boughs of a pear-tree drooping over it. It was opposite the
     yellow-washed wall, across the road, that the file of soldiers was drawn up; the captives were
     facing the muzzles of their rifles and the red-faced boy-officer had stationed himself stiffly
     at the farther end of the file. The dust settled and died down—and there followed (so it seemed
     to William) an agony of waiting for something that would not happen. Long beating seconds
     (three or four of them at most) while two men stood upright with bandaged eyes and rifles
     pointed at their hearts; long beating seconds, while a bird fluted in the pear-tree—a
     whistle-note infinitely careless.... And then (thank God for it!) a voice and a report that
     were as one.... The man with the grizzled hair threw out an arm and toppled with his face in
     the dust; the mayor slid sideways against the wall with the blood dribbling from his mouth.</t:p>
</t:div>