<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>CHAPTER VIII</t:head>
<t:p>Fundamentally William was no more of a coward than the majority of his fellow-men, and, put
     to it, he would have emulated the shivering little mayor and tried to strut gamely to his end;
     it was as much sheer bewildered amazement as the baseness of bodily terror that had him by the
     throat when he saw the hostages done to death—sickening and shaking him and, for the moment,
     depriving him of self-control. Never before, in all his twenty-eight years, had he seen a man
     come to his end; so far death had touched him only once, and but slightly, by the unseen
     passing of a mother he had not loved; thus the spectacle of violent and bloody dying would of
     itself have sufficed to unnerve and unman him. To the natural shrinking from that spectacle, to
     his natural horror at the slaying of helpless men, to his pity and physical nausea was added
     the impotent, gasping confusion of the man whose faith has been uprooted, who is face to face
     with the incredible. Before his eyes had been enacted the impossible—the ugly and brutal
     impossible—and beneath his feet the foundations of the earth were reeling. The iron-mouthed
     guns and the marching columns which had hitherto passed him as a dusty pageant took life and
     meaning in his eyes; they were instruments of the ugly impossible. There was meaning too in the
     lonely grave and in the lonely house—whence men had fled in terror of such scenes as his eyes
     had witnessed. So far, to him, the limit of human savagery had been the feeding through the
     nose of divers young women who, infected with the virus of martyrdom, demanded to be left to
     die—and now he had witnessed the killing of men who desired most greatly to live. At the time
     he did not—because he could not—analyse either the elements of the situation or his own
     attitude towards it; but he knew afterwards, vaguely but surely, that in that one bewildering
     and ruthless moment the heart of his faith was uprooted—his faith in that large vague entity
     the People, in the power of Public Opinion and Talk, in the power of the Good Intention....
     Until that moment he had confounded the blunder with the crime, the mistaken with the evilly
     intentioned. It had not seemed to him possible that a man could disagree with him honestly and
     out of the core of his heart; it had not seemed to him possible that the righteous could be
     righteous and yet err. He knew now, as by lightning flash, that he, Faraday, a thousand others,
     throwing scorn from a thousand platforms on the idea of a European War, had been madly, wildly,
     ridiculously wrong—and the knowledge stunned and blinded him. They had meant so well, they had
     meant so exceedingly well—and yet they had prophesied falsely and fact had given them the lie.
     Until that moment he had been in what he called politics the counterpart of the Christian
     Scientist, despising and denying the evil that now laughed triumphant in his face. With its
     triumph perforce he was converted. War was: men were shot against walls. Converted, though as
     yet he knew not to what form of unknown faith.</t:p>
<t:p>He did not see what became of the two dead bodies—whither they were taken or by whom they
     were buried—for they had barely fallen to the ground and his eyes were still closed that he
     might not look on the blood that was dribbling from the mayor's moustache when a hand tapped
     him smartly on the shoulder and he found Heinz standing beside him. He had a glimpse of men
     moving round the bodies, a glimpse of his wife's face staring and sickly, another of a passing
     motor-cycle, and then Heinz turned him to the door where the sentries stood on guard. With his
     captor's hand on his shoulder he went into the low white house, along a little passage on the
     ground floor and into a room on the right, at the back of the house; Griselda coming after him,
     still staring and white-faced and likewise with a hand on her shoulder. In the room—large and
     sunny with windows looking on to a garden—was a man in uniform and spectacles writing at a
     table, and, erect and complacent beside him, the fattish moustachioed officer who had watched
     the execution from the doorstep. He was lighting a cigar with a hand that did not tremble.
     William and Griselda were escorted by their guards into the middle of the room and planted
     there, standing in front of him.</t:p>
<t:p>After what he had seen, and with the memory of Heinz's threats, William Tully believed most
     firmly that he too was about to die; and with the conviction there filled his heart (as it
     would have filled the heart of any honest lover) a great and intolerable pity for Griselda, his
     new-made wife. She, the woman, would be left where he, the man, would be taken—and he dared not
     turn his head towards her lest he might see her face instinct with the agony of the coming
     parting, lest, foreseeing and resisting it, she should fling her arms about him and croon over
     him as the sallow-faced woman in respectable black had crooned over the head of her man. Her
     meanings, the meanings of a woman unknown, had torn at his inmost heart; how should he bear it
     when Griselda, his darling, clung fast to him and cried in vain for pity? ... That he might not
     see Griselda's face even with the tail of an eye he stared hard and steadily over the officer's
     shoulder. He never forgot the wall-paper beyond the well-filled grey uniform; it was dingy mud
     and orange as to ground with a ponderous pattern of clumped and climbing vegetables. In one
     spot, opposite the window, where a blaze of sunlight struck it, the mud and orange was
     transfigured to shining gold—and William knew suddenly that he had never seen sunlight before.
     For the first time he saw it as vivid glory from heaven—when his eyes (as he thought) would
     soon close on its splendour for ever. Not only his sight but his every sense was alert and most
     sharply intense; on a sudden the thudding of guns in the distance was threateningly nearer at
     hand, and, in the interval between the gun-bursts, a wasp beating up and down the window-pane
     filled the room with a spiteful humming.</t:p>
<t:p>It was while he stood waiting for the doom he believed to be certain, while the German
     captain looked him up and down and addressed curt unintelligible questions to those who had
     made him their prisoner—that there stirred in the breast of William Tully the first faint sense
     of nationality. He did not recognize it as such, and it was not to be expected that he should,
     since his life for the last few strenuous years had been largely moulded on the principle that
     the love of one's country was a vice to be combated and sneered at. If you had told him a short
     day earlier that the thought of the soil he was born on could move and thrill and uplift him,
     he would have stared and despised you as a jingo, that most foolish and degraded of survivals;
     yet with his eyes (as he thought) looking their last on the blazing gold that was sunlight,
     with the sword suspended over his trembling head, something that was not only his pitiful love
     for Griselda, something that was more than his decent self-respect, fluttered and stirred
     within him and called on him to play the man. It bade him straighten his back before men of an
     outlandish race, it bade him refrain from pleading and weakness before those who were not of
     his blood; and for the first time for many years he thought of himself as a national, a man of
     the English race. Not consciously as yet and with no definite sense of affection for England or
     impulse to stand by her and serve her; but with a vague, unreasoning, natural longing for home
     and the narrow things of home. It mattered not that the England he longed for was small,
     suburban, crowded and noisily pretentious; he craved for it in the face of death, as other men
     crave for their spacious fenlands or the sweep of their open downs. England as he knew her
     called him, not with the noisy call of yesterday, but in a voice less strident and more tender;
     he knew now that it was dreadful to die away from her. Instinctively, thinking on London, he
     drew himself up to the height of his five foot five and—as the mayor had done before him—he
     lifted his chin in would-be defiance and dignity.</t:p>
<t:p>There—with the attempt to subdue the trembling flesh and defy brute insolence and tyranny—the
     resemblance between the two men's cases ended. For the time being William ran no risk of a
     violent and bloody ending; there was no further need of an example and he had offended the
     conqueror only by his poor little presence. Further—though he expressed his enjoyment of it
     less noisily and emphatically than his three subordinates had done—the humour of his prisoner's
     situation appealed to Heinz's superior officer almost as much as it had appealed to Heinz
     himself. He grinned perceptibly as he questioned the couple in his somewhat halting English;
     chuckled audibly when they confirmed his subordinate's statement as to their complete ignorance
     of the European upheaval; and when he had elicited the fact that the hapless pair had been
     spending their honeymoon in the secluded valleys of Ardennes he removed his cigar from his
     moustachioed lips that he might chuckle long and unhindered.</t:p>
<t:p>"Honeymoon," he repeated, his stout shoulders trembling with merriment. "In a nice, quiet
     place, wiz no one to interrupt zee kissings. Never mind—you will have a very good honeymoon
     with us and you will very soon be able to go back to England. Just so soon as the Sherman Army
     shall have been there. You should be very pleased that you are safe with us: it is more
     dangerous to be in London."</t:p>
<t:p>William, with his nerves tuned up to face a firing party, withered miserably under heavy
     jocularity. He knew instinctively that his life was saved to him; but the assurance of safety
     was conveyed in a jeer, and at the moment (so oddly are we made) the jeer hurt more than the
     assurance of safety relieved him. He had mastered his anguish and strung himself up—to be
     treated as a figure of fun; the spectacled clerk at the writing-table was laughing so heartily
     that he had to remove his glasses and wipe them before he continued his labours. William
     tingled all over with helpless rage as Griselda tingled beside him. But yesterday he would have
     told you loftily that both he and his wife were inured to public, above all to official,
     ridicule; but it is one thing to brave ridicule with an approving audience in the background,
     another to face it unapplauded, uncrowned with the halo of the martyr.... They reddened and
     quivered whilst incomprehensible witticisms passed between the captain and his clerk. It was an
     intense relief when a nod and a brief order signified that the jest was sufficiently enjoyed
     and their audience with the captain at an end. They were too thankful even to resent the
     roughness with which Heinz collared his man while his comrade collared Griselda.</t:p>
</t:div>