<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>CHAPTER XVI</t:head>
<t:p>There was to be a gulf henceforth between William and Faraday, and the twain who had once
     lived so near together were to see but little of each other; yet it was Faraday who gave him
     the first word of comfort as he walked by the side of his former disciple on the road to
     William's flat. "If," he said suddenly and awkwardly—they were nearing their destination and it
     was the first time he had opened his lips since he led William out of the hall—"if it's this
     recruiting business, this refusal, that's adding to your trouble, I don't think you need be too
     much discouraged. Honestly—you see it isn't necessarily final. I know for a fact they're
     refusing men now, because they can't equip them as fast as they come in. They haven't the
     uniforms, the accommodation, or the arms, and that's why they sent up the standard for recruits
     with a rush. But if the thing's as big as they say—the common talk is that Kitchener has
     prophesied three years of it, and it's very likely true—they'll be wanting every man who'll
     come in before they've done with it. Not only the big chaps—every one. It will merely be a
     question of a few months—at the outside only a few months. So I shouldn't take this refusal to
     heart."</t:p>
<t:p>His message of comfort cost Faraday something to deliver; it was the sheer wretchedness of
     the broken little man beside him that moved him to deny his principles, by implication if not
     in so many words. The only audible reply that he received was a sniff, but even in the darkness
     he knew that his inconsistency had not been wasted, and that William had gained from it some
     measure of help and consolation. He said no more, and they parted with constraint on the
     pavement outside the flat—to tread through the future ahead of them their separate and several
     ways. Faraday did not go back to his meeting; he left it to break up or pursue as it would,
     while he walked the streets restlessly alone.</t:p>
<t:p>Between the uttering and fulfilment of Faraday's prophecy William's way, for the next few
     weeks, was the way of drift and uncertainty; it was also the way of great loneliness, an
     experience entirely new to him. Loneliness not only by reason of the loss of his wife, but
     because of the gap that the war had made between himself and his former associates. With the
     ending of his platform and committee career he was cut off, automatically and completely, from
     the fellowship of those who had been his co-workers in the various causes and enthusiasms he
     had once espoused and advocated. It was not that all of his former co-workers would have
     disagreed with his altered point of view; his was not the only perversion to militarism the
     stalwarts had to deplore; it was merely that he ceased to meet them. All the same the new
     isolation in which he lived was largely due to his own initiative or lack of it, since many,
     even among the stalwarts would have given him kindly welcome and done their best to be of help
     to him personally; but after the meeting in Bloomsbury he felt small desire to seek them out.
     On the contrary, he shrank into himself and avoided, as far as possible, any contact with those
     whose very presence would remind him of the busy, self-satisfied life he had passed in their
     company, of the vanished, theoretical world where he had met Griselda and loved her. It was a
     real misfortune that his small private income, though to a certain extent affected by the war,
     was yet sufficient to keep a roof over his head and supply him with decent necessaries of food
     and clothing. Thus, he was not driven to the daily work of hand or brain that might have acted
     as a tonic to the lethargic hopelessness of his mood. Nature had not made him versatile and he
     had lived in a groove for years; and, his occupation as a public speaker gone, he was left
     without interest as well as without employment. More than once, goaded into spasmodic activity
     by some newspaper paragraph, he offered himself vaguely for war-work—only to be discouraged
     afresh by the offer of an entirely unsuitable job or by delays and evasions which might have
     discouraged men more competent and energetic than himself.</t:p>
<t:p>In one respect fortune was kind to him; he was able, within a week or two of his return to
     London, to get rid of the lease of the haunted little flat in Bloomsbury. The place was
     dreadful to him, with its empty demand for Griselda, and he left it thankfully for a lodging in
     Camden Town. There for some weeks he lived drearily in two small rooms, with no occupation to
     fill up the void in his life, passing hermit days in the company of newspapers and poring over
     cheap war literature; he bought many newspapers and much war literature and aroused the
     sympathy of his elderly landlady by his helplessness and continual loneliness. What kept him
     alive mentally was his thirsty interest in the war; anything and everything that dealt with it
     was grist to his mill, and he acquired necessarily in the course of his eager reading some
     smattering of European history and the outlines of European geography. The pamphlet and journal
     soon ceased to satisfy, and he felt the need of supplementing their superficial comments and
     sketchy allusions by reading that was not up-to-date. A newspaper denunciation of the Silesian
     policy of Frederick the Great led him to Macaulay and others on the Kaiser's ancestor, and
     references to the Franco-German War resulted in the borrowing from the nearest Free Library of
     a volume of modern French history. One volume led on to others and the local librarian came to
     know him as a regular client.</t:p>
<t:p>His reading was haphazard, but perhaps, for that reason, all the more informative and
     illuminating. So far he had acquired such small learning as he possessed on a definite and
     narrow plan, assimilating only such facts as squared with his theories and rejecting all the
     others; where his new studies were concerned the very blankness of his ignorance was a
     guarantee of freedom from prejudice. He stumbled amongst facts and opinions, making little of
     them and yet making much—since for the first time in his life there was no glib mentor to guide
     him and he was thrown on his own resources. With his theories demolished and his mind blank as
     a child's, he became aware of phases of human idea and striving of which he had known nothing
     in the past, and the resulting comprehension of the existence of spheres outside his own
     increased his sense of the impossibility of his previous classification of mankind into the
     well-intentioned and the evil. His own experience had shown him that there might be at least a
     third class—the ignorant, the mistaken, to which he, William Tully, belonged—and his reading,
     by its very vagueness, confirmed that personal experience. As he floundered through histories,
     bewildered and at random, he realized dizzily, but none the less surely, something of the vast
     and terrifying complexity of these human problems upon which he had once pronounced himself
     with the certainty of absolute ignorance.</t:p>
<t:p>The Free Library, though he knew it not, was a salve to his wounded heart; all unconsciously
     he had done the best for himself in applying his mind to matters of which his little wife had
     known nothing. Bismarckian policy and the Napoleonic Wars were topics he had not discussed and
     interests he had not shared with her; hence they tended to come between him and her memory and
     distract him from lonely brooding. Without his new studies he might have drifted into sheer
     melancholia and helplessness; as it was, he burned midnight gas over his books and kept his
     brain alive. In a measure his interest in his new studies was personal; the craving to strike
     back was always with him and his reading fed and fanned it; beginning without system he was
     naturally enough attracted by the drama and movement of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic
     epoch, read avidly all that the librarian could give him on the subject and moulded his ideas
     of a soldier's life and military science on the doings of men of those days. The seed of hope
     that Faraday had implanted did not die, and he thought of himself as a soldier to be, while
     queer little ambitions flamed up in his barren heart. He read of Ney and Murat, who had carried
     marshals' batons in their knapsacks—until, the fervour of his obsession growing, he dreamed of
     himself as an avenging leader, and, with a half-confessed idea of fitting himself for the
     office, applied hours to the study of the art of war through the medium of an obsolete volume
     on military lore picked up from a second-hand bookstall in the Charing Cross Road. By its
     aid—it had been published in the early 'fifties—he attempted to work out the strategy of Kluck
     and Joffre, and spent long evenings poring over diagrams explanatory of the tactics of Napoleon
     at Montereau or the Archduke Charles at Essling.</t:p>
<t:p>For a time his only real human intercourse, and that by letter, was with Edith Haynes; he had
     written to her telling of his rejection for the Army and she wrote to him more than
     occasionally. She was fixed busily in her Somersetshire home, looking after the property of a
     brother fighting in Flanders, acting as bailiff and herself taking a hand in farm-work. For the
     first few weeks after Griselda's death she remained William's only friend in the new world of
     war, and it was not until he had been settled for nearly two months in his Camden Town lodging
     that he discovered that some at least of his former associates had seen fit, like himself, to
     reconsider their views and take up arms for their country. He ran against one of them—Watson,
     in the old days a fiery committee-member of his branch—in the garb of the London Scottish; and
     he did not know how lonely he had been until he spent an evening in the convert's company,
     talking his heart out, talking of the war and himself.</t:p>
<t:p>With the first announcement of the reduction in the standard of height for recruits he tried
     to enlist again and was again refused—this time by the doctor who seemingly had doubts about
     his heart. On the way home a fool woman, arrogating to herself the right to make men die for
     her, offered him a white feather as he stood waiting for his 'bus—whereupon he turned and swore
     at her using filthy words that were strange to his lips till her vapid little face grew
     scarlet. That day, for the first time, his books were no comfort to his soul and he thrust them
     away and sat brooding—understanding perhaps how personal and revengeful had been his interest
     in the lore of the past, understanding how strong had been the dreams and ambitions he had
     cherished in his empty heart. Watson, dropping in for a final chat before starting on foreign
     service, found him sullen and inert before his fire, and, casting about for a method of
     comfort, suggested application to another recruiting station; he knew, he said, of more than
     one man who, refused at a first medical examination, had been passed without trouble at a
     second. Hope was beaten out of William and he shook his head ... all the same, next morning he
     tubed to the other end of London, there to make his third attempt.</t:p>
<t:p>He asked his way to the townhall and in a species of dull resignation stood waiting his turn
     for the ordeal of medical inspection. When it came he went listlessly through the now familiar
     process, stripped, was weighed and measured, was pummelled, showed his teeth, answered
     questions. It was the stethoscope that had done the business yesterday, and would do it again
     to-day; not that there was anything the matter with him or his heart—it was just the blind
     cruel stupidity that was always and in everything against him.... While the doctor bent to
     listen he was wondering what he should do with to-morrow, what he should do with the next day,
     what he should do with his life!</t:p>
<t:p>He had made so sure of a third rejection that he could hardly believe his ears when he heard
     he was up to the physical standard required of a soldier of the King. "You've made a mistake,"
     was on the tip of his tongue, and though he checked the words before they were uttered, he
     stood dazed and staring, much as he had done on the day he was first refused. He could not
     remember clearly what happened to him next or what he did; he went where he was told, he sat
     and waited, he repeated words which he knew must have been the oath; his fellows talked to him
     and he answered back ... but all he was conscious of was the stunning fact of his acceptance.
     It seemed to him Griselda must know and rejoice—and he had thoughts of her watching him, of her
     white soul blessing him to victory.</t:p>
</t:div>