
BEFORE THE STORM
 Sunday in London has got itself a bad name among those who occasionally spend one at their
     hotel, and miss the band, their letters, and the theatre at night; but at Dr. Baumgartner's
     there was little to distinguish the seventh day from the other six. The passover of the
     postman, that boon to residents and grievance of the traveller, was a normal condition in the
     dingy house of no address. More motor-horns were heard in the distance, and less heavy traffic;
     the sound of church bells came as well through the open windows; then the street-door shut, and
     there was a long period
      without Phillida, until it opened and shut again, and in she peeped with her
     parasol and Prayer-book, as though they were all quite ordinary people without a guilty secret
     among them! 
 Such was the Sunday morning. It was fine and warm. Dr. Baumgartner pottered about his untidy
     little garden, a sun-trap again as Pocket had seen it first; the Turk's head perspired from
     internal and external heat, but its rich yellow, shading into richer auburn, clashed rather
     with a red geranium which the doctor wore jauntily in the button-hole of his black alpaca
     jacket. 
 It was Phillida who had given him the flower at breakfast. She grew what she could in the
     neglected garden; the plants in the miniature conservatory were also hers, though the doctor
     took a perfunctory interest in them, obviously on her account. It was obvious at least to
     Pocket Upton. He saw all these things, and what they meant. He was not without his little gifts
     of observation and deduction. He noticed the difference in Baumgartner's voice when he
     addressed his niece, the humane kindling of the inexorable eyes, and to-day he thought he saw a
     reciprocal softening on the part of Phillida. There had been none to see yesterday or the day
     before. It was her uncle whom the girl had seemed unable to forgive for the unseemly scuffle of
     Friday morning.
      But now it was as though memory and common fairness had set years of kindness
     against these days of unendurable mystery, and bidden her endure them with a better grace. If
     she felt she had been disloyal to him, she could not have made sweeter amends than she did by
     many an unobtrusive little office. And she exchanged no more confidences with poor Pocket. 
 Yet these two were together most of the day; all three were; and it was a strangely peaceful
     day, a day of natural hush, and the cessation of life's hostilities, such as is sometimes
     almost pointedly bestowed before or after a time of strain. It was a day on which Pocket
     certainly drew his spiritual breath more freely than on any other since the dire catastrophe.
     There were few fresh clouds; perhaps the only one before evening was the removal of the book on
     hallucinations in which Pocket had become interested on the Saturday afternoon. It was no
     longer lying about the room as he had left it. There was a gap in its place in the shelf. The
     book had been taken away from him; it made him feel as though he were back again at his very
     first dame's school. 
 And the church bells sent him back to the school he was at now! They were more mellow and
     sedate then the chapel bells there, that rang you down the hill at the double if you were late
     and not too
      asthmatical; and Pocket saw and heard himself puffing up the opposite hill to
     take his place for chapel call-over in the school quad. The fellows would be forming in squads
     there now, all in their Sunday tails or Eton jackets as the case might be; of course Pocket was
     in tails, though still rather proud of them. The masters, in their silk hoods or their
     rabbit-skins were prominent in his mind's eye. Then came the cool and spacious chapel, with its
     marble pulpit and its brazen candelabra, and rows of chastened chapel faces, that he knew
     better than his own, giving a swing to chants which ran in his head at the very thought. How
     real it all was to him, and how unreal this Sunday morning, in the sunny room with the battle
     engravings over the book-cases, and the walnut chairs in front of them, and Dr. Baumgartner in
     and out in his alpaca coat! After chapel he would have gone for a walk with Blundell
      minor, most probably, or else written his letter home and got it over. And
     that chapter would have ended with cold boiled beef and apple-pie with cloves in it at
     Spearman's. 
 The Italian restaurant which sent in Dr. Baumgartner's meals certainly provided richer fare
     than that. There was a top-floor of soup in the portable contrivance, and before the meat a
      risotto, which the doctor praised without a single patriotic reservation. 

 “Italy is a country where one can live,” said he. “Not that you must understand me to be
     altogether down on your own fatherland, my young fellow; there is something to be said for
     London, especially on a Sunday. No organs from my dear Italy, none of those so-called German
     bands which we in Germany would not tolerate for a moment; no postman every hour of the day,
     and no gaolbirds crying false news down the streets.” 
 Pocket looked for a grim twinkle in the speaker's eye, but found it fixed on Phillida, who
     had not looked up. Instinct prompted Pocket to say something quickly; that he had not seen a
     postman there, was the actual remark. 
 “That is because I conduct my correspondence at my club,” explained the doctor. “I give out
     no other address; then you only get your letters when you want them.” 
 “Do you often go there?” the boy ventured to inquire, devoutly wishing he would go that
     afternoon. 
 “Not when I have visitors,” replied Baumgartner, with a smiling bow. “And I look upon my
     patients in that light,” he added, with benevolent but futile hypocrisy, embarrassing enough to
     Phillida, but not more so than if she had still believed it to be the truth. 
 Silence ensued until they were all in the other room; then the niece took refuge at her
     piano,
      and this time Pocket hung over her for an hour or more. He went through her
     music, and asked for everything that Lettice played or sang. Phillida would not sing to him,
     but she had the makings of a pianist. The boy's enthusiasm for the things he knew made her play
     then as well as ever he had heard them played. Even the doctor, dozing in the big chair with
     eyes that were never quite shut, murmured his approval more than once; he loved his Mendelssohn
     and Schubert, and had nothing to say against the Sousas and others that the boy picked out as
     well, and mentioned with ingenuous fervour in the same breath. Pocket would have sung himself
     if the doctor had not been there, for he had a bit of a voice when he was free from asthma; and
     once or twice he stopped listening to wonder at himself. Could he be the boy who had killed a
     man, however innocently, three days before! Could it be he whom the police might come and carry
     off to prison at any moment? Was it true that he might never see his own people any more? Such
     questions appalled and stunned him; he could neither answer them nor realise their full import.
     They turned the old man in the chair, who alone could answer them, back into the goblin he had
     seemed at first. Yet they did give a certain shameful zest and excitement even to this quiet
     hour of motley music in his presence. 

 Besides, there was always one comfort to remember now: his letter home. Of course Lettice
     would show it to their father; of course something would be done at once. Shame and sorrow for
     the accident would be his for ever; but as for his present situation, there were moments when
     Pocket felt rather like a story-book cabin-boy luxuriously marooned, and already in
     communication with the mainland. 
 He wondered what steps had been taken so far. No doubt his father had come straight up to
     town; it was a moving thought that he might be within a mile of that very room at that very
     moment. Would all the known circumstances of his disappearance be published broadcast in the
     papers? Pocket felt he would have red ears all his life if that were done; and yet it had hurt
     him a little to gather from Baumgartner that so far there was nothing in the papers to say he
     had so much as disappeared. That fact must have been known since Thursday or Friday. Once it
     did cross his mind that to keep it from his mother they would have to keep it out of the
     papers. Well, as long as she did not know! 
 He pictured the blinds down in her room; it was the hour of her afternoon rest. If he were
     at home, he would be going about quietly. Lettice would be reading or writing in the
     morning-room,
      most probably. Father would be gloating over his rhododendrons with a strong
     cigar; in his last letter the boy had heard how beautiful they were. Horace might be with him,
     smoking a cigarette, if he and Fred were not playing tennis. Their pocket edition had not to
     look very far ahead to see himself smoking proper cigarettes with the others, to hear his own
     voice telling them of his own experience—of this very hour at Dr. Baumgartner's. Even Fred and
     Horace would have to listen to that! Pocket looked at the long lean figure in the chair, at the
     eyelids never quite closed, and so imparting at once a softening and a sinister effect. He
     noted the drooping geranium in his buttonhole, and grey ash from the Turk's head sprinkling the
     black alpaca coat. It brought the very phrases of a graphic portrait almost to his lips. 
 Yet if anybody had told the boy he was beginning to gloat over the silver lining to the
     cloud that he was under, and that it was not silver at all but one of the baser metals of the
     human heart, how indignantly he would have denied it at first, how humbly seen it in the end! 
 When Phillida went off to make the tea her uncle sought his room and sponge, but did not
     neglect to take Pocket with him. Pocket was for going higher up to his own room; but
     Baumgartner said that would only make more work, in a tone
      precluding argument. It struck Pocket that the doctor really needed sleep, and
     was irritable after a continuous struggle against it. If so, it served him right for not
     trusting a fellow—and for putting Boismont in the waste-paper basket, by Jove! 
 There was no mistaking the red book there; it was one of the first things Pocket noticed,
     while the doctor was stooping over his basin in the opposite corner; and the schoolboy's
     strongest point, be it remembered, was a stubborn tenacity of his own devices. He made a dive
     at the waste-paper basket, meaning to ask afterwards if the doctor minded his reading that
     book. But the question never was asked; the book was still in the basket when the doctor had
     finished drying his face; and the boy was staring and swaying as though he had seen the dead. 
 “Why, what's the matter with my young fellow?” inquired Baumgartner, solicitously. 
 “Nothing! I'll be all right soon,” muttered Pocket, wiping his forehead and then his hand. 
 “You look faint. Here's my sponge. No, lie flat down there first!” 
 But Pocket was not going to lie down on that bed. 
 “I do feel seedy,” he said, in a stronger voice with a new note in it, “but I'm not going to
     faint. I'm quite well able to go upstairs. I'd rather lie down on my own bed, if you don't
     mind.” 

 His own bed! The irony struck him even as he said the words. He was none the less glad to
     sit down on it; and so sitting he made his first close examination of two or three tiny squares
     of paper which he had picked out of the basket in the doctor's room instead of Boismont's book
     on hallucinations. There had been no hallucination about those scraps of paper; they were
     fragments of the boy's own letter to his sister, which Dr. Baumgartner had never posted at all.
    
