
THE GLASS EYE
 Dr. Baumgartner produced a seasoned meerschaum, carved in the likeness of a most ferocious
     face, and put a pinch of dark tobacco through the turban into the bowl. “You see,” said he, “I
     must have my smoke like you! I can't do without it either, though what is your misfortune is my
     own fault. So you are also a photographer!” he added, as the fumes of a mixture containing
     latakia spiced the morning air. 
 “I am only a beginner,” responded Pocket, “but a very keen one.” 
 “You don't merely press the button and let
      them do the rest?” suggested the doctor, smiling less coldly under the influence
     of his pipe. 
 “Rather not! I develop, print, tone, and all the rest of it; that's half the fun.” 
 “Plates or films?” inquired Baumgartner, with an approving nod. 
 “Only plates, I'm afraid; you see, the apparatus is an old one of my father's.” 
 And honest Pocket was beginning to blush for it, when the other made a gesture more eloquent
     and far more foreign than his speech. 
 “It's none the worse for that,” said he. “So far we have much in common, for I always use
     plates myself. But what we put upon our plates, there's the difference, eh?” 
 “I should imagine so,” said Pocket, smiling. 
 Dr. Baumgartner was smiling too, and still less coldly than before, but yet darkly to
     himself, and at the boy rather than with him. 
 “You take portraits of your friends, perhaps?” 
 “Yes; often.” 
 “In the body, I presume?” 
 Pocket looked nonplussed. 
 “You only take them in the flesh?” 
 “Of course.” 
 “Exactly! I take the spirit,” said the doctor; “that's the difference.” 
 Pocket watched the now wonderfully genial
      countenance of Baumgartner follow the brutal features of the meerschaum Turk
     through a melting cloud of smoke. The boy had been taken aback. But his bewilderment was of
     briefer duration than might have been the case with a less ardent photographer; for he took a
     technical interest in his hobby, and read the photographic year-books, nearly as ravenously as
      Wisden's Almanacke. 
 “I see,” he said, lukewarmly. “You go in for psychic photography.” 
 “Psychic,” said Baumgartner; for the public schoolboy, one regrets to report, had pronounced
     the word to rhyme with sly-chick. The doctor added, with more disdain: “And you don't believe
     in it?” 
 “I didn't say so.” 
 “But you looked and sounded it!” 
 “I don't set myself up as a believer or unbeliever,” said the boy, always at his ease on a
     subject that attracted him. “But I do say I don't believe in the sort of thing I read somewhere
     last holidays. It was in a review of a book on that sort of photography. The chap seemed to
     have said you could get a negative of a spirit without exposing the plate at all; hide away
     your plate, never mind your lens, only conjure up your spirit and see what happens. I'll swear
     nothing ever happened like that! There may be ghosts, you may see them,
      and so may the camera, but not without focusing and exposing like you've got to do
     with ordinary flesh and blood!” 
 The youth had gone further and flown higher than he meant, under the stimulus of an
     encouragement impossible to have foreseen. And the doctor had come to his feet, waving
     eloquently with his pipe; his grey face beamed warmly; his eyes were lances tipped with fire. 
 “Well said, my young fellow!” cried he. “I agree with every syllable you have spoken.” 
 “It's a question of photography, not of spiritualism,” concluded Pocket, rounding off his
     argument in high excitement. 
 “I agree, I agree! All that is rubbish, pure moonshine; and you see it even at your age! But
     there's much more in it than that; you must see the rest as well, since you see so far so
     clearly.” The boy blushed with pleasure, determined to see as far as anybody. “You admit there
     may be such things as ghosts, as you call them?” he was asked as by an equal. 
 “Certainly, sir.” 
 “Visible shapes, in the likeness of man? As visible and yet as tangible as that sunbeam?” 
 “Rather!” 
 “You allow that the camera can see them if we can?” 

 Pocket allowed it like the man he was being made to feel; the concession gave him a generous
     glow. Promotion had come to him by giant leaps. He felt five years older in fewer minutes. 
 “Then,” cried the doctor, with further flattery in his air of triumph, “then you admit
     everything! You may not see these images, but I may. I may not see them, but my lens may! Think
     how much that glass eye throws already upon the retina of a sensitised film that our living
     lenses fail to throw upon ours; think of all that escapes the eye but the camera catches. Take
     two crystal vases, fill one with one acid and the other with another; one comes out like water
     as we see it; the other, though not less limpid in our sight, like ink. The eye sees through
     it, but not the lens. The eye sees emptiness as though the acid itself were pure crystal; the
     lens flings an inky image on the plate. The trouble is that, while you can procure that acid at
     the nearest chemist's, no money and no power on earth can summon or procure at will the spirit
     which once was man.” 
 His voice was vibrant and earnest as it had been when Pocket heard it first an hour earlier
     in the Park. It was even as passionate, but this was the passion of enthusiastic endeavour. If
     the man had a heart at all, it was in this wild question without a doubt. Even the schoolboy
      perceived this dimly. There was something else which had become clearer to him
     with each of these later remarks. Striking as they seemed to him, they were not wholly
     unfamiliar. The ring of novelty was wanting to his ear. 
 Suddenly he exclaimed, “I knew I knew your name!” 
 “You do know it, do you?” 
 Baumgartner spoke ungraciously, as though the announcement was discounted by the
     interruption it entailed. 
 “It was in connection with the very book I mentioned. I knew I had come across it
     somewhere.” 
 “You read the correspondence that followed the review?” 
 “Some of it.” 
 “My letter among others?” 
 “Yes! I remember every word of it now.” 
 “Then you recall my view as to the alleged necessity of a medium's co-operation in these
     spirit-photographs?” 
 “You said it wasn't necessary, if I remember,” replied Pocket somewhat tentatively, despite
     his boast. 
 “It was the pith and point of my contention! I mentioned the two moments at which I hold
     that a man's soul may be caught apart, may be cut off
      from his body by no other medium than a good sound lens in a light-tight camera.
     You cannot have forgotten them if you read my letter.” 
 “One,” said the boy, “was the moment of death.” 
 “The moment of dissolution,” the doctor corrected him. “But there is a far commoner moment
     than that, one that occurs constantly to us all, whereas dissolution comes but once.” 
 Pocket believed he remembered the other instance too, but was not sure about it, the fact
     being that the whole momentous letter had struck him as too fantastic for serious
     consideration. That, however, he could not and dared not say; and he was not the less
     frightened of making a mistake with those inspired eyes burning fanatically into his. 
 “The other moment,” the doctor said at last, with a pitying smile, “is when the soul returns
     to its prison after one of those flights which men call dreams. You know that theory of the
     dream?” Baumgartner asked abruptly. The answer was a nod as hasty, but the doctor seemed
     unconvinced, for he went on didactically: “You visit far countries in your dreams; your soul is
     the traveller. You speak to the absent or the dead; it is your soul again; and we dismiss the
     miracle as a dream! I fix the moment as that of the soul's return because its departure on
     these errands is imperceptible,
      but with its return we awake. The theory is that in the moment of waking the whole
     experience happens like the flash of an electric spark.” 
 The boy murmured very earnestly that he saw; but he was more troubled than enlightened, and
     what he did see was that he had picked up a very eccentric acquaintance indeed. He was not a
     little scared by the man's hard face and molten eyes; but there was a fascination also that
     could not be lost upon an impressionable temperament, besides that force of will or character
     which had dominated the young mind from the first. He began to wish the interview at an end—to
     be able to talk about it as the extraordinary sequel of an extraordinary adventure—yet he would
     not have cut it short at this point if he could. 
 “I grant you,” continued the doctor, “that the final flight of soul from body is infinitely
     the more precious from my point of view. But how is one to be in a position to intercept that?
     When beloved spirits pass it would be cold-blooded desecration; and public opinion has still to
     be educated up to psychical vivisection! I have myself tried in vain to initiate such
     education. I have applied for perfectly private admission to hospital deathbeds, even to the
     execution-shed in prisons. My applications have been peremptorily refused.” 
 Pocket's thoughts went off at a gruesome tangent. 

 “You could see a man hanged!” he shuddered, and himself saw the little old effigy on the
     model drop in Marylebone Road. 
 “Why not?” asked the other in wide wonder. “But as I am not allowed,” he continued in
     lighter key, “I have to do the best I can. If I cannot be in at the death, I may still by luck
     be in at a dream or two! And now you may guess why I wander with my camera where men come in to
     sleep in broad daylight. I prowl among them; a word awakens them; and then I take my chance.” 
 “They're not all like that man this morning, then,” remarked Pocket, looking back on the
     inanimate clod reclining in the dew. 
 The doctor deliberated with half-shut eyes that seemed to burn the brighter for their
     partial eclipse. 
 “This morning,” he rejoined, “was like no other. I owe you some confidence in the matter. I
     had the chance of a lifetime this morning—thanks to you!” 
 “Thanks to me?” repeated Pocket. A flash enlightened him. “Do you mean to say I—you took
     me—walking——?” 
 “You shall see my meaning,” replied Baumgartner, rising. “Wait one minute.” 
 He was not gone longer. Pocket heard him on the other side of double doors in an alcove; but
     he had gone out into the passage to get there. Running
      water and the chink of porcelain were specially audible in his absence, but the
     boy was thinking of another sound. The doctor before leaving had discarded a black alpaca
     jacket, light as a pocket handkerchief, which had fallen so softly as to recall by contrast the
     noise made by the revolver in the pocket of the cloak. The lad was promptly seized with a
     strong desire to recover his property; he was within an ace of doing so, the cloak containing
     it being actually in his hands and only dropped as Baumgartner returned to announce that all
     was ready. 
 Sharp to the left, at the end of the passage, was a door which would simply have been a
     second way into the drawing-room had the double doors within been is use; these being shut, the
     space behind made a separate chamber which again reminded the schoolboy of his study, that
     smallest of small rooms. This one was as narrow, only twice the length. One end was monopolised
     by the door that admitted them, the other by a window from floor to ceiling. And this window
     was in two great sheets of ruby glass, so that Pocket looked down red-hot iron steps into a
     crimson garden, and therefrom to his companion dyed from head to foot like Mephistopheles. 
 “This is something like a dark-room!” exclaimed the lad as the door was shut and locked
     behind him. The folding doors were permanently barred by
      shelves and lockers; opposite was a long porcelain trough, pink as the doctor's
     shirt-sleeves in the strong red light; racks of negatives and stoppered bottles glimmered over
     brass taps stained to an angry copper. 
 Everything was perfection from a photographer's standpoint; the boy felt instantaneously
     spoilt for his darkened study and his jugs of water. All he had ever sighed for in the
     prosecution of his hobby was here in this little paradise of order and equipment. The actual
     work, he felt, would be a secondary consideration in such a workshop; the mere manipulation of
     such stoppered bottles as his host was handling now, the choice of graduated phials, the wealth
     of trays and dishes, would have been joy enough for him. He watched the favoured operator with
     a watering mouth. A crimson blind had been lowered to reduce the light; the doctor had turned
     up his shirt-cuffs; his wrists were muscular and furry, as it now seemed with a fiery fur, yet
     they trembled with excitement as he produced his plate. And Pocket remembered how extravagant
     an image was expected on that plain pink surface. 
 He did not know whether to expect it or not himself. It was difficult to believe in that
     sort of thing, difficult to disbelieve in this sort of man, who entertained no shadow of doubt
     himself, whose
      excitement and suspense were as infectious as everything else about him. Pocket
     had come into the dark-room wheezing almost as much as ever; he was not to be heard breathing
     as the plate was rocked to and fro as in raspberry-juice, and gradually the sky showed sharp
     and black. But the sky it was that puzzled Pocket first. It was broken by perpendicular objects
     like white torpedoes. He was photographer enough to know what these were almost at once; they
     were those poplars in the park. But how could Baumgartner have photographed Pocket with those
     poplars behind him when they had been behind Baumgartner all the time? 
 Pocket said to himself, “Where am I, by the way?” and bent lower to see. His ear touched the
     doctor's; it heard the doctor breathing as though he were the asthmatic; and now a human shape
     was visible, but not walking in its sleep, lying in it like the man in the wet grass. “When did
     you get me?” asked Pocket aloud. But the tense crimson face paid no attention; in the ruby
     light it was glistening as though with beads of blood. 
 “There! there! there!” croaked a voice, husky and yet staccato. Pocket could scarcely
     believe it was the voice of his host—the one gentle thing about him. “You saw the figure?
     Surely you saw something else, hovering over it? I did, I swear I did! But now we shall have to
     wait.” 

 The plate had blackened all over, as though the uncanny thing had choked out its life. It
     was meticulously held under a tap, between fingers that most distinctly trembled now. Then he
     plunged it in the hyposulphite, and pulled up the blind. The sun shone again through the tall
     window, blood-red as before; grass and sky were as richly incarnadined. Baumgartner babbled
     while he waited for the fixing-bath to clear the plate. The chance of his life, he still
     pronounced it. “And I owe it to you, my young fellow!” This he said again and again, aloud but
     chiefly to himself. He picked up the plate at last and held it to the flaming window. He cried
     out in German to himself, a cry the schoolboy never forgot. 
 “Open the window!” he ordered. “It opens like a door.” 
 Pocket did as he was told. The pure white sunlight struck him momentarily blind. Baumgartner
     had the plate under the tap again. Pocket thought him careless with it, thought the tap on too
     full; it was held up an instant to the naked sun, and then dashed to a hundred fragments in the
     porcelain trough. 
 Pocket knew better than to ask a question. He followed his leader back into the
     drawing-room, and watched him pick up his coat. It might have been a minute before their eyes
     met again; the
      doctor's were calm and cold and critical as in the earlier morning. It was another
     failure, he said, and nothing more. Breakfast would be ready soon; they would go upstairs; and
     if his young fellow felt equal to a warm bath, he thought as a physician it might do him good.
    
